Translation

German Road Traffic Regulations
I.
General traffic rules
Section 1 Basic rules
(1) Use of the road requires constant care and mutual respect.
(2) A person using the road shall act in such a way as not to harm or endanger or,
more than is unavoidable in the circumstances, to hinder or inconvenience any other
person.
Section 2 Use of the road by vehicles
(1) Vehicles must use the carriageways; on dual carriageways they must use the
right-hand carriageway. Verges do not constitute part of the carriageway.
(2) Drivers and riders must always keep as far to the right as possible, not only when
traffic is approaching from the opposite direction, when being overtaken, when
approaching the brow of a hill, on bends or when their view ahead is obstructed.
(3) Vehicles travelling on or beside the tracks of a railway, tramway, etc., must let the
latter pass if possible.
(3a) When roads are slippery due to freezing rain, packed snow, slush, black ice or
hoar frost, a motor vehicle may not be operated unless it is fitted with tyres that have
the characteristics described in Annex II, paragraph 2.2 of Council Directive
92/23/EEC of 31 March 1992 relating to tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers and
to their fitting (OJ L 129, 14.5.1992, p. 95), as amended by Directive 2005/11/EC (OJ
L 46, 17.2.2005, p. 42) (snow tyres). Category M2, M3, N2 and N3 motor vehicles, as
defined in Annex XXIX to the German Road Vehicles Registration and Licensing
Regulations, as amended on 26 April 2012 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 679), may also
be operated during such weather conditions if snow tyres are fitted only to the wheels
of their drive axles. The first sentence does not apply to commercial vehicles used for
agricultural and forestry purposes or to emergency vehicles operated by the
organizations referred to in section 35(1) if no snow tyres are available for these

17-0336-K 14

Translation

vehicles due to their design. If visibility is less than 50 metres or if the roads are
slippery due to packed snow or black ice, persons operating vehicles carrying
dangerous goods subject to marking requirements must not endanger any other
person; if necessary, they must pull into the next suitable place for parking.
(4) Pedal cyclists must ride in single file; they may only ride two or more abreast if
this does not obstruct traffic. They are not obliged to use cycle tracks in their direction
of travel unless this is indicated by sign 237, 240 or 241. Right-hand cycle tracks
without sign 237, 240 or 241 may be used. Left-hand cycle tracks without sign 237,
240 or 241 may not be used unless this is indicated by the supplementary standalone sign with the legend “Radverkehr frei” (“for use by cyclists”). In addition, pedal
cyclists may use right-hand verges if there are no cycle tracks and pedestrians are
not obstructed. Riders of motor-assisted bicycles and e-bikes may use cycle tracks
outside built-up areas.
(5) Children under eight years of age must use the footway for cycling; children under
ten years of age may use the footway for cycling. If there is a cycle track physically
separated from the carriageway, children under eight years of age may, by
derogation from the first sentence, also use this cycle track. If a child under eight
years of age is accompanied by a suitable responsible older person, the latter may
also cycle on the footway while they are accompanying the child; a responsible
person is especially suitable if they are at least 16 years of age. Particular
consideration must be shown towards pedestrians. Pedestrians must be neither
endangered nor impeded. If necessary, speed must be adapted to that of the
pedestrians. Before crossing a carriageway, the children and the responsible person
accompanying them must dismount.
Section 3 Speed
(1) A person operating a vehicle may only travel at a speed that allows them to be in
constant control of their vehicle. In particular, they must adjust their speed to road,
traffic, visibility and weather conditions as well as to their personal abilities and to the
nature of their vehicle and its load. If, owing to fog, snowfall or rain, visibility is less
than 50 metres, they must not travel faster than 50 kph; where circumstances so
require, they must travel at a lower speed. Their speed must be such that they can
stop within their forward range of vision. However, on carriageways that are so

17-0336-K 14

Translation

narrow that oncoming vehicles may be endangered, they must slow down so that
they are able to stop within at least half of their range of forward vision.
(2) No motor vehicle must, without good reason, travel so slowly as to impede the
flow of traffic.
(2a) The behaviour of persons operating vehicles towards children, persons in need
of help and elderly persons must be such as to prevent any endangerment of these
road users, especially by reducing their speed and being ready to brake.
(3) The maximum permissible speed, even in the most favourable circumstances, is:
1.

50 kph for all motor vehicles within built-up areas;

2.

outside built-up areas:
a ) 80 kph for
aa) motor vehicles with a maximum authorized mass
between 3.5 and 7.5 tonnes, with the exception of
passenger cars;
bb) passenger cars towing a trailer;
cc)

goods vehicles and motor homes, in both cases with a
maximum authorized mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes,
towing a trailer;

dd) buses and coaches, also when towing a luggage trailer;
b ) 60 kph for
aa)motor vehicles with a maximum authorized mass exceeding
7.5 tonnes;
bb)all motor vehicles towing a trailer, with the exception of
passenger cars, goods vehicles and motor homes with a
maximum authorized mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes in
each case;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

cc)buses and coaches carrying passengers who have to stand
because all the seats are taken;
c ) 100 kph for passenger cars as well as other motor vehicles with a
maximum authorized mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes.
This speed limit does not apply on motorways (sign 330.1) and other roads
with carriageways separated by a central reservation or other structures. Nor
does it apply on roads with at least two lanes for each direction marked by a
centre line (sign 295) or by lane markings (sign 340).
(4) The maximum permissible speed for motor vehicles fitted with snow chains is 50
kph, even in the most favourable circumstances.
Section 4 Distance
(1) A person operating a vehicle moving behind another vehicle must, as a rule, keep
a sufficient distance from that other vehicle so as to be able to pull up safely even if it
suddenly slows down or stops. The person operating the vehicle in front must not
brake suddenly without a compelling reason.
(2) Outside built-up areas, a person operating a motor vehicle that is subject to a
special speed limit, as well as a person operating a combination of vehicles of more
than 7 metres overall length, must always keep such a distance from the motor
vehicle in front that an overtaking motor vehicle can move back to the right-hand side
of the road. This does not apply:
1.

if they pull out for the purpose of overtaking and have indicated their intention
to do so;

2.

if there is more than one lane in the direction of traffic;

3.

on sections of road where overtaking is prohibited.

(3) On motorways, a person operating a goods vehicle with a maximum authorized
mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes or a bus/coach must, if their speed is more than 50 kph,
keep a distance of at least 50 metres from vehicles in front.
Section 5 Overtaking
(1) Persons wishing to overtake must do so on the left.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(2) They may overtake only if they can see that, during the entire overtaking
manoeuvre, they will in no way impede oncoming traffic. Furthermore, they may
overtake only if they travel at a speed substantially higher than that of the vehicle to
be overtaken.
(3) Overtaking is not permitted:
1.

if the traffic situation is not clear;

2.

where it is prohibited by a traffic sign (sign 276, 277).

(3a) Notwithstanding any other prohibitions of overtaking, a person operating a motor
vehicle with a maximum authorized mass exceeding 7.5 tonnes must not overtake if,
owing to fog, snowfall or rain, visibility is less than 50 metres.
(4) A person who intends to pull out for overtaking must make sure that traffic
approaching from behind is not endangered. During overtaking, a sufficient lateral
distance must be kept from other road users, particularly pedestrians and pedal
cyclists. A person who is overtaking must move back to the right-hand side of the
road as soon as possible. A person is who is overtaking must not impede the vehicle
being overtaken.
(4a) The intention of pulling out to overtake and of moving back to the right-hand side
of the road are to be signalled clearly and in good time, using the vehicle’s direction
indicators to do so.
(5) Outside built-up areas, the intention to overtake may be indicated by short horn or
headlight flasher signals. If a flasher signal is given, persons operating oncoming
vehicles must not be dazzled.
(6) A person driving a vehicle that is being overtaken must not increase the vehicle’s
speed. A person driving a slow-moving vehicle must reduce the vehicle’s speed at a
suitable place and, if necessary, wait if this is the only way to allow several vehicles
immediately behind it to overtake. A suitable verge may also be used for this
manoeuvre; this is not, however, permissible on motorways.
(7) A person who has indicated their intention to turn left, and has properly filtered
into a position to do so, is to be overtaken on the right. Rail-borne vehicles are to be

17-0336-K 14

Translation

overtaken on the right. If this is not possible because the rails are situated too far to
the right, these vehicles may be overtaken on the left. On one-way carriageways, railborne vehicles may also be overtaken on the left.
(8) Where sufficient space is available, riders of pedal cycles and motor-assisted
bicycles may overtake, at moderate speed and with special care, vehicles waiting in
the nearside lane on their right-hand side.
Section 6 Passing
A person who wishes to pass to the left of a road narrowing, an obstacle on the
carriageway or a stationary vehicle must allow oncoming vehicles to pass through.
The first sentence does not apply if priority is regulated differently by traffic signs
(sign 208, 308). If they have to pull out, they must observe traffic approaching from
behind and indicate their intention of pulling out and of moving back to the right-hand
side of the road again, in the same way as if they were overtaking.
Section 7 Use of lanes by motor vehicles
(1) On carriageways with several lanes for one direction, motor vehicles may ignore
the requirement to keep as far to the right as possible (section 2(2)) if traffic density
justifies them doing so. “Lane” means that part of the carriageway which a vehicle
with more than two wheels requires for travelling freely along the carriageway.
(2) If the density of traffic has resulted in queues of vehicles in the lanes of one
carriageway, traffic on the right (nearside lane, middle lane) may move faster than
traffic on the left (offside lane, middle lane).
(2a) If, on a carriageway for one direction of traffic, a vehicle queue has formed and
come to a standstill or is moving at low speed in the left-hand lane, vehicles may
overtake this queue on the right at a slightly higher speed and with the utmost care.
(3) On carriageways with several marked lanes for one direction of traffic (sign 296 or
340) within built-up areas – with the exception of motorways (sign 330.1) –, motor
vehicles with a maximum authorized mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes are free to
choose their lane, even if the conditions specified in the first sentence of subsection
(1) do not obtain. In this case, traffic on the right may move faster than traffic on the
left.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(3a) If, on a carriageway for traffic in both directions, a total of three lanes are marked
by lane markings (sign 340), the left-hand lane, which is solely for the use of
oncoming traffic, and the middle lane must not be used for overtaking. The same
applies to carriageways on which a total of five lanes for both directions are marked
by lane markings (sign 340); in this case, the two left-hand lanes, which are solely for
the use of oncoming traffic, and the middle lane must not be used for overtaking. A
person wishing to turn left may move to the middle lane in the direction of travel if
there are a total of three or five lanes for both directions.
(3b) On carriageways for both directions of traffic with four lanes marked by lane
markings (sign 340), the two left-hand lanes in the direction of travel are solely for the
use of oncoming traffic; they must not be used for overtaking. The same applies on
six-lane carriageways to the three left-hand lanes in the direction of travel.
(3c) If, outside built-up areas, three lanes for one direction of traffic are marked by
sign 340, motor vehicles may, in derogation from the rule that they must keep as far
to the right as possible, use, and continue in, the middle lane in places where – even
if only now and then – a vehicle is stationary or moving in the nearside lane. On
carriageways with more than three lanes marked in this way for one direction of
traffic, the same applies to the second lane from the right. Outside built-up areas,
goods vehicles with a maximum authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes as well as all
vehicles towing a trailer may use the left-hand lane only if they change to this lane for
the purpose of turning left.
(4) If, on roads with several lanes for one direction, uninterrupted travel in one of the
lanes is not possible, or if a lane comes to an end, vehicles travelling in the adjacent
lane must allow vehicles in the other lane to change lanes immediately before the
road narrows, in such a way as to let them join their line of traffic in turn after each
vehicle travelling in the uninterrupted lane (“zip-merging”).
(5) In all cases, lanes may only be changed if other road users are not endangered.
Any change of lane must be signalled clearly and in good time, using the vehicle’s
direction indicators to do so.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 7a Diverging lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes
(1) Where lanes diverge from the main carriageway, especially on motorways and
motor roads, vehicles turning off may, from the beginning of and to the right of a lane
marking with broad lines (sign 340), travel faster than traffic on the main carriageway.
(2) On motorways and other roads outside built-up areas, vehicles may travel faster
in acceleration lanes than traffic on the main carriageway.
(3) In deceleration lanes, vehicles must not travel faster than traffic on the main
carriageway. If traffic on the main carriageway is moving slowly or is stationary,
vehicles in a deceleration lane may overtake at a moderate speed and with great
care.
Section 8 Right of way
(1) At intersections and junctions, vehicles coming from the right have the right of
way. This does not apply:
1.

if the right of way is specially regulated by traffic signs (sign 205, 206, 301,
306); or

2.

to vehicles entering the road from an earth track or forest path.

(1a) If, at the approach to a roundabout, sign 215 (roundabout) is placed below sign
205 (give way), traffic on the roundabout has the right of way. Use of the direction
indicators is not permitted when entering such a roundabout.
(2) A person who has to give way must clearly and in good time show, by means of
appropriate driving behaviour, especially by reducing their speed, that they are going
to wait. They may only proceed if they can see that they will neither endanger nor
substantially impede a road user who has the right of way. If they are unable to see
this because the intersection or junction has limited visibility, they may carefully
advance onto the intersection or junction until they have a clear view. Nor must a
road user who is obliged to give way substantially impede a road user who has the
right of way when the latter turns into the other road.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 9 Turning off, turning round (U-turns) and reversing
(1) A person wishing to turn off must clearly and in good time indicate their intention,
using their direction indicators to do so. A person wishing to turn right must take up a
position as far to the right as possible; a person wishing to turn left must, in good
time, take up a position in the middle of the road, and on one-way carriageways as
far as to the left as possible. A person wishing to turn left may only take up a position
on rails running parallel to the road if they do not impede a rail-borne vehicle. Before
taking up the correct position and once again before turning, attention must be paid
to traffic approaching from behind; this is not necessary before turning in cases
where traffic approaching from behind cannot be endangered.
(2) Pedal cyclists wishing to turn left do not need take up a position on the left if they
intend to cross the carriageway after the intersection or junction from the right-hand
edge of the carriageway. When crossing, they must pay attention to vehicles
approaching from both directions. Pedal cyclists using cycle facilities to turn off must
follow them when crossing the intersection or junction.
(3) A person wishing to turn off must allow oncoming vehicles to pass; they must
allow rail-borne vehicles, motorized cycles and pedal cycles to pass even when they
are travelling in the same direction on or alongside the carriageway. This also applies
to regular service buses and other vehicles using dedicated lanes marked as such.
Special consideration must be shown towards pedestrians; if necessary, vehicles
must wait.
(4) A person wishing to turn left must first allow oncoming traffic intending to turn right
to pass. Vehicles approaching from opposite directions and both wishing to turn left
must do so in front of each other, unless the traffic situation or the design of the
intersection requires the vehicles turning left to do so after they have passed each
other.
(5) When turning into a property, making a U-turn or reversing, a person operating a
vehicle must, in addition, ensure that no other road users are endangered; if
necessary, they must ask another person to give them directions.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 10 Entering the road and moving off
A person who intends to enter a road from a property, from a pedestrian zone (signs
242.1 and 242.2) or from a traffic-calmed area (signs 325.1 and 325.2) or to enter the
carriageway from other parts of the road or over a lowered kerb or who intends to
move off from the edge of the carriageway must do so in such a way as not to
endanger any other road users; if necessary, they must ask another person to give
them directions. They must clearly and in good time signal their intention to enter the
road or to move off, using their direction indicators to do so. In places where
clarification is necessary, sign 205 may be installed.
Section 11 Special traffic situations
(1) If traffic is moving slowly, vehicles must not enter an intersection or junction, even
if they have the right of way or the traffic lights are green, if by doing so they would be
forced to wait there.
(2) As soon as vehicles on motorways and roads outside a built-up area with at least
two lanes for one direction start to move at walking pace or come to a standstill,
these vehicles must leave a gap for one direction between the lane on the far left and
the lane immediately adjacent to it on the right to allow police and emergency
vehicles to pass.
(3) Moreover, anyone who, according to traffic rules, may proceed or otherwise has
the right of way must relinquish this priority if the traffic situation so requires; a person
not having the right of way may proceed only if the person having the right of way has
signalled to them to do so.
Section 12 Stopping and parking
(1) Stopping is not permitted:
1.

on sections of road that are narrow and where visibility is restricted;

2.

near or on sharp bends;

3.

on acceleration and deceleration lanes;

4.

on level crossings;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

5.

in front of and on officially marked access roads for fire engines;

(2) A person who leaves their vehicle or stops for more than three minutes shall be
deemed to be parking.
(3) Parking is not permitted:
1.

before and after intersections and junctions up to a distance of 5 metres from
the intersection points of the carriageway edges;

2.

where it would block access to marked parking spaces;

3.

in front of entrances to and exits from properties bordering on the road; on
narrow roads also opposite such entrances and exits;

4.

over manhole covers and other such covers, where parking on the footway is
permitted by sign 315 or by marked parking spaces (Annex 2, number 74);

5.

in front of dropped kerbs.

(3a) Regular parking of motor vehicles with a maximum authorized mass exceeding
7.5 tonnes and trailers with a maximum authorized mass exceeding 2 tonnes within
built-up areas
1.

in exclusively or generally residential areas,

2.

in special areas serving recreational purposes,

3.

in health resorts and

4.

in the surroundings of hospitals

is prohibited between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. as well as on Sundays and public holidays.
This does not apply to appropriately marked car parks or to the parking of regular
service buses at their terminus.
(3b) Trailers without a towing vehicle must not be parked for more than two weeks.
This does not apply to appropriately marked car parks.
(4) For parking, the verge on the right-hand side, including parking lanes provided
along the carriageway, must be used if it is sufficiently stabilized; otherwise vehicles

17-0336-K 14

Translation

must move to the right-hand edge of the carriageway. As a rule, this also applies to
persons who only want to stop; at any rate, they too must keep to the right of the
right-hand side of the carriageway. Taxis may, if the traffic situation permits them to
do so, pick up or set down passengers alongside other vehicles that have stopped or
are parked on the verge or the right-hand edge of the carriageway. Where there are
rails on the right-hand side and in the case of one-way streets (sign 220), stopping
and parking on the left-hand side is permitted. Stopping is not permitted within the
swept path of rail-borne vehicles.
(4a) Where parking on the footway is permitted, only the right-hand footway, in oneway streets the right-hand or the left-hand footway, is to be used for this purpose.
(5) At a parking gap, the person who arrives there first has priority; they retain this
priority if they pass the gap in order to reverse into it or if they make any other
manoeuvres to pull into the gap. The first sentence applies mutatis mutandis if the
person is waiting at a parking gap that is being vacated.
(6) Vehicles must be parked in such a way that they take up as little space as
possible; as a rule, this also applies to stopping.
Section 13 Equipment for monitoring parking time
(1) Parking at parking meters is permitted only while the meter is in operation; at
parking ticket machines it is permitted only with a pay-and-display ticket, which must
be displayed on or in the vehicle so as to be clearly legible from outside; in both
cases parking is allowed during the permissible parking time.
If a parking meter or a parking ticket machine is not in working order, parking is only
allowed up to the maximum parking time indicated. In this case, a parking disc is to
be used (para. 2 of the first sentence of subsection (2)). The parking time rules may
be restricted to certain hours or days.
(2) If, in a no waiting zone (signs 290.1 and 290.2) or a parking management zone
(signs 314.1 and 314.2) or on signs 314 or 315, the use of a parking disc is required
by a supplementary sign (Fig. 318). stopping and parking are only permitted:
1.

during the time indicated on the supplementary sign;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

2.

if a clearly legible parking disc is displayed within the vehicle and the indicator
of the disc is pointing to the half hour that follows the time of arrival.

If parking meters or parking ticket machines have been installed in a no waiting zone
or a parking management zone, the instructions given on them apply. This is without
prejudice to the provisions governing the prohibitions of stopping and parking.
(3) The equipment for monitoring parking time referred to in subsections (1) and (2)
does not have to be operated if parking charges can be paid or parking time
monitored by means of electronic equipment or devices, especially personal parking
meters or mobile phones. The first sentence does not apply if the electronic
equipment or device referred to therein is not in working order.
(4) It is not necessary to operate the equipment or devices for monitoring parking
time when:
1.

picking up or setting down passengers; and

2.

loading or unloading goods.

Section 14 Obligation to take care when getting into or out of a vehicle
(1) A person getting into or out of a vehicle must do so in such a way as not to
endanger any other road users.
(2) A person operating a vehicle must take the necessary measures to avoid
accidents or traffic disruption when leaving the vehicle. Motor vehicles must also be
secured against unauthorized use.
Section 15 Vehicle breakdowns
If a vehicle with more than two wheels breaks down at a place where it cannot be
recognized in time as a stationary obstacle, the hazard warning lights must be
switched on immediately. Subsequently, at least one clearly visible warning sign must
be put up at a sufficient distance – in the case of fast-moving traffic at a distance of
about 100 metres; prescribed safety devices such as warning triangles are to be
used. In addition, the provisions governing the lighting of stationary vehicles apply.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 15a Vehicle towing
(1) When a vehicle that has broken down on a motorway is towed away, the
motorway (sign 330.1) must be left at the next exit. (2) When towing away a vehicle
that has broken down on another road, a motorway (sign 330.1) must not be entered.
(2) During the towing operation, the hazard warning lights of both vehicles must be
switched on.
(3) Motorcycles must not be towed away.
Section 16 Warning signals
(1) Road users may give audible and light signals only if:
1.

they are overtaking another vehicle outside a built-up area (section 5(5)); or

2.

they consider themselves or others to be in danger.

(2) A person operating a regular service bus or a school bus marked as such must
switch on the vehicle’s hazard warning lights when approaching a bus stop and for as
long as passengers are boarding or alighting if the authority responsible for road
traffic under federal state law (road traffic authority) has ordered such a measure for
certain bus stops. In all other cases – with the exception of breakdowns (section 15)
and vehicles being towed away (section 15a) – road users may switch on their
hazard warning lights only if others are endangered by their vehicle or if they want to
warn others of any dangers, for instance when approaching a tailback or when
driving especially slowly on motorways or other roads where high speeds are
permitted.
(3) Audible warning signals must not consist of a sequence of tones of different pitch.
Section 17 Lighting
(1) At dusk, during the hours of darkness and at dawn or when visibility so requires,
the lighting devices prescribed must be used. The lighting devices must not be
covered by any object or be dirty.
(2) Driving with position lights (sidelights) only is not permitted. Nor is the use of the
main beam on continuously and adequately lit roads permitted. Headlights must be

17-0336-K 14

Translation

dipped in good time when an oncoming vehicle approaches or when travelling closely
behind another vehicle or if the safety of traffic on or beside the road so requires. If
necessary, speed must be reduced appropriately.
(2a) Motorcyclists must also use dipped headlights or switch on their daytime running
lights during the hours of daylight. At dusk, during the hours of darkness and at dawn
or when visibility so requires, dipped headlights must be used.
(3) If visibility is seriously reduced owing to fog, snowfall or rain, dipped headlights
must also be used during the hours of daylight. Fog lights may only be used in such
weather. If a vehicle is equipped with two fog lights, the additional use of the position
lights (sidelights) instead of dipped headlights is sufficient. Motorcycles without a
side-car may use their fog light only. Rear fog lights may be used only if visibility is
less than 50 metres due to fog.
(4) Outside built-up areas, stationary vehicles are to be illuminated using their own
light source. Within built-up areas, it is sufficient either to illuminate only the side of
the vehicle facing the carriageway by means of the vehicle’s parking lights or to mark
it in any other permissible way; if the street lighting makes the vehicle clearly visible
at a sufficient distance, lighting using the vehicle’s own light source can be dispensed
with. Vehicles with a maximum authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes, with the
exception of passenger cars, and trailers standing on the carriageway within a builtup area must always be illuminated using their own light source or marked by means
of other permissible lighting equipment. Vehicles that can be easily removed from the
carriageway, such as motorcycles, motorized cycles, pedal cycles, invalid carriages,
single-axle tractor units, single-axle trailers, hand carts or unharnessed horse-drawn
vehicles, must not be left on the carriageway without lighting during the hours of
darkness.
(4a) In the case of military vehicles deviating from the general lighting rules, yellowand-red retroreflecting warning plates or equivalent safety devices are to be used.
They may also be used additionally on these vehicles.
(5) Pedestrians operating single-axle tractors or machines or pushing/pulling
handcarts must affix to the left-hand side of these vehicles at least one lamp emitting

17-0336-K 14

Translation

non-dazzling white light that is clearly visible from the front and from behind; this
lamp may also be carried by hand.
(6) Spotlights may be used for a short time only and not for the purpose of
illuminating the carriageway.
Section 18 Motorways and motor roads (roads for motor vehicles only)
(1) Motorways (sign 330.1) and motor roads (roads for motor vehicles only) (sign
331.1) may be used only by motor vehicles with a maximum design speed of more
than 60 kph; the same applies to trailers they are towing. The vehicle and its load,
taken together, must not be higher than 4 metres and not wider than 2.55 metres.
Refrigerated vehicles must not be wider than 2.6 metres.
(2) Vehicles may join a motorway only at marked junctions (sign 330.1); they may join
motor roads only at intersections and three-way junctions.
(3) Traffic on the main carriageway has the right of way.
(4) (repealed)
(5) On motorways within built-up areas, vehicles may travel faster than 50 kph. On
these motorways, as well as on motor roads with two carriageways separated by a
central reservation or any other structures outside built-up areas, the maximum
permissible speed, even under the most favourable circumstances, is:
1.

80 kph for
a) motor vehicles with a maximum authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes,
with the exception of passenger cars;
b) passenger cars towing a trailer, goods vehicles towing a trailer, motor
homes towing a trailer and tractor units towing a trailer; and
c) buses and coaches without a trailer or towing a luggage trailer;

2.

60 kph for
a) motorcycles towing a trailer and self-propelled machines towing a trailer;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

b) tractor units towing two trailers; and
c) buses and coaches towing a trailer or carrying passengers who have to
stand because all the seats are taken;
3.

100 kph for motor coaches and buses without a trailer:
a) which, according to the entry in Part I of their registration certificate, are
permitted to travel at a maximum speed of 100 kph;
b) which are constructed principally for the carriage of seated passengers and
in which the passenger seats are designed as coach-style seating;
c) which are fitted with seat belts on all seats and on wheelchair spaces if
they are used for the carriage of wheelchair users;
d) which are fitted with a speed limiter set to a maximum speed of 100 kph
(Vset);
e) which meet the requirements of Directive 2001/85/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2001 relating to special
provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising
more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat, and amending
Directives 70/156/EEC and 97/27/EC (OJ L 42, 13.2.2002, p. 1) in the
version in force at the time of the first registration of the bus or coach in
question;
f) which are not fitted with regrooved tyres on their front steering axle; or
g) for buses and coaches not registered in Member States of the European
Union or in states parties to the Agreement on the European Economic
Area if an official certificate can be presented that has been issued by the
country of registration in the German language confirming compliance with
the aforementioned provisions and confirming that inspections have taken
place annually, the scope of which is at least that of Council Directive
96/96/EC of 20 December 1996 on the approximation of the laws of the
Member States relating to roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their
trailers (OJ L 46, 17.2.1997, p. 1), as amended.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(6) Road users using dipped headlights on a motorway need not adjust their speed to
the range of their dipped headlights if:
1.

the rear lights of the motor vehicle in front are clearly visible and a sufficient
distance is maintained between the vehicles;

2.

it is possible to recognize in good time the course of the carriageway thanks to
guiding devices provided with reflectors and, together with external light
sources, to identify obstacles on the road.

(7) Making U-turns and reversing are prohibited.
(8) Stopping is prohibited, including on verges.
(9) Pedestrians must not enter motorways. They may cross a motor road only at
intersections, junctions or other places provided for this purpose; they must not enter
these roads at any other places.
(10) Leaving the motorway is permitted only at places marked by the exit sign (sign
332) and by the flag-type sign (sign 333) or by one of these signs. Leaving motor
roads is permitted only at intersections or junctions.
(11) If visibility is reduced to 50 metres or less by heavy snowfall or rain, or if there is
packed snow or black ice, goods vehicles with a maximum authorized mass
exceeding 7.5 tonnes, including their trailers, and tractor units must not use the lane
on the far left
Section 19 Level crossings
(1) Rail-borne vehicles have priority:
1.

at level crossings marked by a St Andrew’s Cross (sign 201);

2.

at level crossings on footpaths, field paths, forest paths or cycle tracks;

3.

in port areas and on industrial estates, if a St Andrew's Cross with the
supplementary sign bearing the legend “Hafengebiet, Schienenfahrzeuge
haben Vorrang” (port area, rail-borne vehicles have priority) or

17-0336-K 14

Translation

“Industriegebiet, Schienenfahrzeuge haben Vorrang” (industrial estate, railborne vehicles have priority) has been placed at the entrances.
Road traffic may approach such level crossings only at a moderate speed. A person
operating a vehicle must not overtake motor vehicles at level crossings between sign
151 or 156 and the point at which the rails and road cross.
(2) Vehicles must wait in front of the St Andrew's Cross, and pedestrians must wait at
a safe distance in front of the level crossing, if;
1.

a rail-borne vehicle is approaching;

2.

a red light is flashing or an amber or red light signal shows;

3.

the barriers are being lowered or are closed;

4.

a railway official signals road users to stop; or

5.

an audible signal, such as the whistle of an approaching train, is sounded.

If the flashing red light or red light signal takes the shape of an arrow, only road users
wishing to head in the direction of the arrow have to wait. A bell may indicate that the
barriers are about to be lowered.
(3) If, due to slow-moving traffic, a level crossing cannot be crossed speedily and
without stopping, road users must wait in front of the St Andrew's Cross.
(4) Persons using a footpath, field path, forest path or cycle track must act
accordingly at level crossings not marked by a St Andrew's Cross.
(5) At level crossings where rail-borne vehicles do not have priority, road users must
wait at a safe distance if a railway official gives a stop sign with a white-red-and-white
flag or a red lamp. If amber or red light signals show, section 37(2)(1) applies mutatis
mutandis.
(6) The headlights of waiting motor vehicles must not dazzle any other persons.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 20 Public transport vehicles and school buses
(1) Regular service buses, trams and school buses marked as such which are waiting
at stops (sign 224) may be passed only very carefully; this also applies to traffic
coming from the opposite direction.
(2) If passengers are boarding or alighting, the public transport vehicle may be
passed on the right-hand side only at walking pace and only at such a distance as to
rule out any danger to the passengers. Nor must they be impeded. If necessary, a
person operating a vehicle must wait.
(3) Regular service buses and school buses marked as such which are approaching
a stop (sign 224) and have switched on their hazard warning lights must not be
overtaken.
(4) Regular service buses and school buses marked as such which are waiting at
stops (sign 224) and have switched on their hazard warning lights may be passed
only at walking pace and only at such a distance as to rule out any danger to the
passengers. Traffic moving in the opposite direction on the same carriageway must
also pass the vehicle at walking pace. Nor must passengers be impeded. If
necessary, a person operating a vehicle must wait.
(5) Regular service buses and school buses must be allowed to pull away from bus
stops marked as such. If necessary, other vehicles must wait.
(6) Persons intending to use public transport vehicles must wait on the footway, on
the verge or on a traffic island serving as a public transport stop, otherwise at the
edge of the carriageway.
Section 21 Carriage of passengers
(1) The number of passengers carried by a motor vehicle must not exceed the
number of seats equipped with seat belts. In derogation from the first sentence,
motor vehicles for which seat belts are not required by law for all seats may carry as
many passengers as the number of seats available. The first and second sentences
do not apply to buses and coaches that are permitted to carry standing passengers. It
is prohibited to carry passengers:

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1.

on motorcycles without a special seat;

2.

on tractor units without proper seating; or

3.

in trailer caravans being towed by motor vehicles.

(1a) Children under twelve years of age and less than 150 cm tall may be carried in
motor vehicles on seats for which seat belts are required by law only if child restraint
systems are used which meet the requirements referred to in Article (2)(1)(c) of
Council Directive 91/671/EEC of 16 December 1991 on the compulsory use of safety
belts and the compulsory use of child restraint systems (OJ L 373, 31.12.1991, p.
26), as amended by Article 1(2) of Directive 2014/37/EC (OJ L 59, 9.5.2003, p. 32)
and are suitable for the child. Notwithstanding the first sentence,
1.

the first sentence does not apply to buses and coaches with a maximum
authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes;

2.

children aged three and over may be restrained on rear seats using
the seat belts required by law if it is not possible to fit further child
restraints because other children are being restrained using child
restraint systems;

3.

when persons are being carried by
a ) taxi or
b ) other types of passenger car if there is an obligation to carry within the
meaning of section 22 of the Carriage of Passengers Act,
the requirement that, on rear seats, children be restrained by means of
officially approved and suitable restraint systems is limited to two children
weighing 9 kg or more, and it must at least be possible to restrain one child
weighing between 9 and 18 kg; this exemption does not apply if children are
carried on a regular basis.

(1b) Children under three years of age must not be carried in vehicles that are not
fitted with seat belts. Children aged three and above and less than 150 cm tall
travelling in such vehicles must be carried on the rear seat. The first and second
sentences do not apply to buses and coaches.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Passengers must not be carried on the load area or in load compartments of a lorry.
This does not apply if the passengers being carried on the load area or in load
compartments have to carry out work that is necessary there. Nor does it apply to the
carriage of construction workers within building sites. The carriage of passengers on
the load area or in load compartments of trailers is not permitted. Passengers may,
however, be carried on trailers used for agricultural or forestry purposes if they are
equipped with suitable seating. Standing while the vehicle is in motion is prohibited
unless it is required for the purpose of accompanying the load or carrying out work on
the load area.
Persons of at least 16 years of age may carry children under the age of seven on
pedal cycles only if the cycle is equipped with special seats for the children and if
wheel covers or similar protective devices ensure that the feet of the children cannot
get caught in the spokes. Persons of at least 16 years of age may carry up to two
children under the age of seven in trailers towed by pedal cycles and suitable for the
carriage of children The restriction to children under the age of seven does not apply
to the carriage of a disabled child.
Section 21a Seat belts, protective helmets
(1) Seat belts required by law must be worn while a vehicle is in motion. This does
not apply to:
1.

(deleted)

2.

persons engaged in door-to-door operations if they have to regularly leave
their vehicle at short intervals within the area in which they are providing their
services or delivering goods;

3.

vehicles travelling at walking pace, e.g. for the purpose of reversing and on car
parks;

4.

persons travelling on buses or coaches that are authorized to carry standing
passengers;

5.

operating personnel on buses and coaches and personnel accompanying
groups of persons in need of special care, when performing services that
require them to leave their seat;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

6 . passengers on motor coaches or buses with a maximum authorized mass of
more than 3.5 tonnes when leaving their seat for a short time.
(2) Persons operating or travelling as a passenger on or in motorcycles or open three
or more-wheeled vehicles with a maximum design speed greater than 20 kph must
wear a suitable protective helmet while the vehicle is in motion. This does not apply if
they are wearing seat belts required by law.
Section 22 Loads
(1) Loads, including load restraints and loading equipment, are to be stowed and
restrained in such a manner that they cannot slip, fall over, roll around, fall off the
vehicle or produce avoidable noise, even in an emergency braking situation or if the
vehicle swerves suddenly. This must be done in accordance with sound engineering
practice.
(2) A vehicle and its load must not be wider than 2.55 metres and not be higher than
4 metres. Vehicles used for agricultural or forestry purposes must, when loaded with
agricultural or forestry products or equipment, not be wider than 3 metres, including
the load. If they are loaded with agricultural or forestry products, they may be higher
than 4 metres, including the load. Refrigerated vehicles must not be wider than 2.6
metres.
(3) Up to a height of 2.5 metres, the load must not project beyond the front of the
vehicle or, in the case of combinations of vehicles, beyond the front of the towing
vehicle. In all other cases, the load may project 50 cm beyond the front of the vehicle
or, in the case of combinations of vehicles, 50 cm beyond the front of the towing
vehicle.
(4) The load may project beyond the rear of the vehicle up to a length of 1.5 metres;
in transport operations over distances of up to 100 km, however, up to a length of 3
metres; journeys made outside the territory covered by the present Regulations are
not taken into account. Vehicles or combinations of vehicles must not be longer than
20.75 metres, including the load. If the extreme end of the load projects more than 1
metre beyond the rear reflectors of the vehicle, it is to be made conspicuous by at
least

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1.

one bright red flag not less than 30 x 30 cm in size and kept straight by a
cross-bar;

2.

one light red sign of the same size hanging at right angles to the direction of
travel; or

3.

one vertically attached cylindrical body of the same colour and length with a
diameter of at least 35 cm.

These safety devices must be affixed to the load not higher than 1.5 metres above
the carriageway. If necessary (section 17(1)), at least one red lamp is to be affixed at
the same place and, in addition, a red reflector not higher than 90 cm above the
ground.
(5) If the load, at the sides, projects more than 40 cm beyond the lights of the vehicle
or, in the case of motor vehicles, beyond the extreme edge of the illuminating surface
of the position lights (sidelights) or rear lights, it is to be made conspicuous, if
necessary (section 17(1)), at the sides not more than 40 cm from its outer edge and
not more than 1.5 metres above the carriageway, to the front by a lamp emitting a
white and to the rear by a lamp emitting a red light. Individual bars or poles,
horizontally placed slabs and other poorly visible objects must not project at the
sides.
Section 23 Other obligations of persons operating vehicles
(1) A person operating a vehicle is responsible for ensuring that their view is not
obstructed and their hearing is not impaired by the passengers, animals, the load,
equipment or the condition of their vehicle. They must also ensure that their vehicle,
combination of vehicles, animal-drawn vehicle as well as the load and the
passengers are in accordance with regulations and that the safety of their vehicle is
not impaired by the load or the passengers. They must also take care to ensure that
the licence plates required by law are clearly legible at all times. On motor vehicles
and their trailers as well as on pedal cycles, the lighting equipment required by law
must also be fitted and operational during the hours of daylight; on all other vehicles,
however, only if the operator expects to be still driving when lighting is required
(section 17(1)).

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(1a) A person operating a vehicle must not use a mobile phone or car phone if, in
order to do so, they have to pick up or hold the mobile phone or the car phone
receiver. This does not apply if the vehicle is stationary and, in the case of motor
vehicles, the engine has been switched off.
(1b) A person operating a vehicle must not operate, or carry with them in an
operational condition, a device designed to indicate or interfere with traffic
enforcement measures. This applies in particular to devices designed to interfere with
or indicate speed measurement activities (radar detectors or laser jammers).
(2) A person operating a vehicle must take their vehicle, combination of vehicles or
animal-drawn vehicle off the road via the shortest route if any technical defects which
have occurred while the vehicle was in motion, and which seriously affect road
safety, cannot be repaired without delay; however, motorcycles and pedal cycles may
then be pushed.
(3) A person riding a pedal cycle or motorcycle must not hold on to other vehicles.
They must not ride hands free. They may only take their feet off the pedals or
footrests if road conditions so require.
Section 24 Special means of locomotion
(1) Pushed wheelchairs and wheelchairs with hand grips, sledges, prams and
pushchairs, children’s scooters and pedal cycles, roller blades, roller skates and
similar non-motorized means of locomotion are not be deemed to be vehicles within
the meaning of the present Regulations. The rules governing pedestrians apply to
these means of locomotion mutatis mutandis.
(2) Invalid carriages and wheelchairs other than those referred to in subsection (1)
may be used where pedestrian traffic is permitted, but may only be operated at
walking pace.
Section 25 Pedestrians
(1) Pedestrians must use footways or footpaths. They may walk on the carriageway
only if the road has neither a footway nor a verge. If, within built-up areas, they use
the carriageway, they must walk on the right- or left-hand edge of the carriageway;
outside built-up areas, they must walk on the left-hand edge of the carriageway if

17-0336-K 14

Translation

they can reasonably be expected to do so. During the hours of darkness, when
visibility is poor or if the traffic situation so requires, they must walk in single file.
(2) Pedestrians pushing or towing vehicles or carrying bulky objects must use the
carriageway if they would seriously impede other pedestrians by using the footway or
verge. If pedestrians pushing or towing vehicles use the carriageway, they must walk
on its right-hand edge; prior to turning left, they must not take up a position on the
left.
(3) Pedestrians must cross the carriageway speedily and at right angles to the
direction of traffic, taking the shortest route possible and paying attention to vehicular
traffic; if the traffic situation so requires, they may only cross at intersections or
junctions, at traffic light signals within the markings or on pedestrian crossings (sign
293). If they cross the carriageway at an intersection or junction, they must always
use pedestrian crossings or markings at traffic light signals that are provided there.
(4) Pedestrians must not climb over barriers such as railings or chains. Barrier planks
(sign 600) prohibit pedestrians from entering areas of road closed to traffic.
(5) Tracks that are not also used for other public road transport may be walked on
only at the places provided for this purpose.
Section 26 Pedestrian crossings
(1) At pedestrian crossings, vehicles, with the exception of rail-borne vehicles, must
allow pedestrians as well as users of invalid carriages and wheelchairs to cross the
carriageway when they have clearly indicated their intention to do so. Vehicles may
then approach only at a moderate speed; if necessary, they must wait.
(2) If traffic is moving slowly, vehicles may not be driven onto the pedestrian crossing
if they would have to wait on it.
(3) Overtaking at pedestrian crossings is prohibited.
(4) If the marking leads across a cycle track or another part of the road, these rules
apply mutatis mutandis.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 27 Formations
(1) The rules and regulations uniformly applicable to vehicular traffic as a whole apply
to close formations mutatis mutandis. More than 15 cyclists may form a close
formation. They may then ride two abreast on the carriageway. Groups of children
and young people must walk on the footway, as far as this is possible.
(2) Close formations as well as funeral and other processions must, at suitable
intervals, leave adequate space for other traffic to pass through if this becomes
necessary on account of their length; this traffic must not drive through them at any
other places.
(3) A formation is deemed to be close if other road users can clearly recognize it as
such. In motor vehicle convoys, every vehicle must be individually marked as
belonging to the convoy.
(4) The width of close formations, either riding on horseback or marching on foot,
must, if necessary (section 17(1)), be made clearly visible at least from the front by
non-dazzling lamps emitting white light and from behind by lamps emitting red light or
by flashing amber lights. If such a formation is divided into several, distinctly separate
groups, each of them must be marked in this way. Formations do not need their own
lighting if they are otherwise sufficiently illuminated.
(5) The leader of the formation must make sure that the provisions applicable to close
formations are observed.
(6) Marching in lockstep is not allowed on bridges.
Section 28 Animals
Domestic and farm animals that may endanger traffic shall be kept off the road. They
are permitted there only if accompanied by suitable persons who are able to control
them to the necessary degree. It is forbidden to lead animals from motor vehicles.
Only dogs may be led from pedal cycles.
Horse riders, persons accompanying horses or livestock and drovers are subject
mutatis mutandis to the rules and regulations uniformly applicable to vehicular traffic
as a whole. The minimum lighting requirements are as follows:

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1.

when herding livestock, a non-dazzling lamp emitting white light at the front
and a lamp emitting red light at the rear;

2.

when accompanying large animals, even if there is only one of them, or
livestock, a non-dazzling lamp emitting white light, which must be clearly
visible on the left-hand side from the front and from behind.

Section 29 Excessive use of the road
(1) Motor vehicle races are prohibited.
(2) Permission is required for events in the course of which the road will be subjected
to excessive use. This is the case when the use of the road for normal traffic has to
be restricted because of the number or the behaviour of the participants in the event
or because of the manner in which participating vehicles will be driven; motor
vehicles in a close formation always constitute excessive use of the road. Organizers
must ensure that traffic regulations as well as any other provisions and conditions are
complied with.
(3) Permission is required for the operation of vehicles and combinations of vehicles
whose dimensions, axle loads or total masses actually exceed the generally
authorized legal limits. This also applies to the operation of vehicles where, due to
their design, the operator’s field of vision is restricted.
Section 30 Environmental protection, ban on driving on Sundays and public
holidays
(1) Unnecessary noise and avoidable exhaust gas emissions from vehicles are
prohibited. In particular, it is prohibited to leave vehicle engines running
unnecessarily or to create excessive noise when closing vehicle doors. Unnecessary
driving or riding back and forth within built-up areas is prohibited if it annoys other
persons.
(2) Permission is required for events involving motor vehicles if they are likely to
cause a disturbance during the night.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(3) Goods vehicles with a maximum authorized mass exceeding 7.5 tonnes as well
as trailers towed by goods vehicles must not be operated between midnight and 10
p.m. on Sundays and public holidays. This ban does not apply to:
1.

combined rail/road goods transport from the consignor to the nearest suitable
loading station or from the nearest suitable station of unloading to the
consignee, but only if the distance does not exceed 200 km;

1a.

combined port/road goods transport between the point of loading or unloading
and a port located within a maximum radius of 150 km (delivery or dispatch);

2.

the transport of:
a) fresh milk and dairy products;
b) fresh meat and meat products;
c) fresh fish, live fish and fresh fish products;
d) perishable fruit and vegetables;

3.

journeys made by empty vehicles in connection with journeys referred to under
(2) above;

4.

journeys made by vehicles employed according to the Federal Requisitioning
Act. In these cases, the driver must carry the requisition order with him and
present it to authorized persons for inspection if requested to do so.

(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), public holidays are:
Good Friday;
Easter Monday;
Labour Day (1 May);
Ascension Day;
Whit Monday;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Corpus Christi (only in the Federal States of Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Hesse,
North Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate and Saarland);
Day of German Unity (3 October);
Reformation Day (31 October) (only in the Federal States of Brandenburg,
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia);
All Saints’ Day (only in the Federal States of Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, North
Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate and Saarland);
Christmas Day and Boxing Day
Section 31 Sports and games
(1) Sports and games are not permitted on the carriageway, verges and cycle tracks.
The first sentence does not apply if this is indicated by a supplementary sign showing
the type of sport or game that is permitted.
(2) The following supplementary sign

allows rollerblading and rollerskating. This supplementary sign can also be installed
as a stand-alone sign. Persons rollerblading or rollerskating in these zones must do
so on the far right-hand edge in the direction of travel, taking extreme care and
paying special attention to other road users, and must allow vehicles to overtake.
Section 32 Traffic obstacles
(1) It is prohibited to soil or wet the road or to take objects onto the road and leave
them there if this is likely to endanger or impede traffic. Whoever is responsible for
such obstacles to traffic must immediately remove them and, until they have done so,
mark them sufficiently. Traffic obstacles shall, if necessary (section 17(1)), be
illuminated by their own light source or marked by means of other permissible lighting
equipment.
(2) Scythes, mowing blades or similarly dangerous tools shall be effectively cased or
sheathed.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 33 Traffic disruption
(1) It is prohibited:
1.

to operate loudspeakers;

2.

to offer goods and services of any kind on the road;

3.

to display advertisements and publicity of any kind by means of pictures,
script, light or sound outside built-up areas;

if this is likely to distract or annoy road users, thereby endangering or impeding
traffic. Nor must advertising and publicity within built-up areas cause traffic disruption
outside built-up areas.
(2) Devices that are similar to traffic signs or installations (sections 36 to43 in
conjunction with Annexes 1 to 4), that might be confused with them or that might
impair their effectiveness must not be put up or otherwise used in places where they
are likely to affect traffic. Advertising and publicity in combination with traffic signs
and installations are not permitted.
(3) The prohibitions referred to in paragraph 3 of the first sentence of subsection (1)
and the second sentence of subsection (2) do not apply to signs indicating service
facilities on federal motorways and truckstops where these signs contain information
about services catering directly to the needs of road users on federal motorways.
Section 34 Accidents
(1) Any person involved in a traffic accident must:
1.

stop immediately;

2.

take the necessary steps to ensure traffic safety and, if there is only minor
damage, move their vehicle to the edge of the carriageway;

3.

ascertain the consequences of the accident;

4.

assist injured persons (section 323c of the Penal Code);

17-0336-K 14

Translation

5.

to other persons present at the scene of the accident who were involved and
have suffered damage:
a ) state that they (i.e. the person referred to in the first clause) were involved
in the accident; and
b ) if requested to do so, provide their own name and address, present their
own driving licence and vehicle registration document and, to the best of
their knowledge, provide details of their third-party insurance;

6.
a ) remain at the scene of the accident until, by virtue of their own presence, it
has been possible to identify their personal details, their vehicle and the
nature of their involvement to the benefit of the other persons who were
involved in and have suffered damage in the accident; or
b ) wait for a reasonable length of time and leave their own name and address
at the scene of the accident if nobody was prepared to perform the
identification;
7.

immediately facilitate subsequent identification if they have left the scene of
the accident legitimately, after giving a plausible excuse or upon expiration of
the waiting time (paragraph 6(b)). For this purpose, they must inform at least
the persons referred to above (paragraph 6(a)) or a nearby police station that
they were involved in the accident and must provide their own address, their
present whereabouts as well as the registration number and location of the
vehicle that was involved in the accident, which must be kept available for
immediate investigation for a reasonable length of time.

(2) Any person whose behaviour, under the circumstances, might have contributed to
the accident shall be deemed to be involved in a traffic accident.
(3) Skid marks and other trace evidence must not be removed before the necessary
investigations have been made.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 35 Special rights
(1) The Bundeswehr (Federal Armed Forces), Bundespolizei (Federal Police), fire
brigades, disaster control services, police forces and customs service are exempt
from the provisions of the present Regulations if this is absolutely necessary for the
performance of their statutory functions.
(1a) Subsection 1 applies mutatis mutandis to officials from other countries who, on
the basis of agreements under international law, are authorized to engage in hot
pursuit of or to observe offenders on German territory.
(2) However, the above-mentioned organizations require permission, even if the
conditions in subsection (1) are met:
1.

if they intend to operate more than 30 motor vehicles in a close formation
(section 27);

2.

in every other case of exceptional use of the road, with the exception of that
specified in the second sentence of section 29(3).

The Federal Armed Forces are also authorized to make exceptional use of the road
going beyond subsection (2) if agreements have been made.
(4) The restrictions imposed on the special rights by subsections (2) and (3) do not
apply to operations in connection with accidents, disasters and disturbances of public
safety and order, nor do they apply in the cases of Articles 91 and 87a(4) of the Basic
Law or in a state of defence or tension.
(5) The armed forces of the non-German states parties to the North Atlantic Treaty
shall, in the event of urgent military requirements, be exempt from the provisions of
the present Regulations; they shall be exempt from the provisions of section 29,
however, only if special regulations or agreements have been concluded for these
forces.
(5a) Vehicles of the emergency services are exempt from the provisions of the
present Regulations in cases of the utmost urgency in order to save human life or to
ward off serious damage to health.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(6) Vehicles used for the construction, maintenance or cleaning of roads and road
installations or for refuse collection, and which are marked by white-red-and-white
warning devices, may be driven and may stop on all roads, parts of roads and on
either side of the road in either direction and at any time if their deployment so
requires; for the cleaning of footways, however, they may do so only if their maximum
authorized mass does not exceed 2.8 tonnes. The same applies to vehicles for the
cleaning of footways whose maximum authorized mass does not exceed 3.5 tonnes
and whose tyre pressure is not higher than 3 bar. Care must be taken to ensure that
no damage is done to the footways and utility lines located below them. Persons
employed in connection with these vehicles or supervising roads or road installations
must, during their work off the footways and outside road areas closed to traffic by
barriers, wear high-visibility safety clothing.
(7) Measuring vehicles operated by the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas,
Telecommunications, Post and Railway (section 1 of the Act on the Federal Network
Agency) may be driven and stop on all roads or parts of roads at any time if this is
necessary for the performance of their statutory functions.
(7a) Vehicles operated by companies that provide universal services under section
11 of the Postal Act in conjunction with section 1(1) of the Universal Postal Services
Regulations or vehicles operated by companies that provide these universal services
on their behalf (subcontractors) may, in derogation from Annex 2, no 21 (sign 242.1),
also use pedestrian zones outside the hours shown on supplementary signs for
access by residents and vehicles making deliveries if this is necessary for making
punctual collections from post boxes of for collecting letters in stationary facilities. In
addition, the vehicles referred to in the first sentence may, in derogation from the first
sentence of section 12(4) and Annex 2, no 62 (sign 283), no 63 (sign 286) and no 64
(sign 290.1), also be double-parked on the carriageway for a short period of time
within a range of 10 m before and after a post box if, due to a lack of other suitable
parking places, this is necessary for the purpose of making collections from post
boxes. The first and second sentences only apply if proof that a universal service is
being provided or, additionally, proof that the vehicle is being operated by a
subcontractor tasked with providing this service is displayed in or affixed to the
vehicle such that it is visible at all times. Section 2(3) in conjunction with Annex 3 no
7 of the Regulations on the marking of motor vehicles with a low contribution to the

17-0336-K 14

Translation

pollution level of 10 October 2006 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2218), as amended by
Article 1 of the Regulations of 5 December 2007 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2793),
shall not be applied to the vehicles referred to in the first sentence.
(8) These special rights may be exercised only with due regard to public safety and
order.

II.
Traffic Signs and Installations
Section 36 Signals and instructions given by police officers
(1) The signals and instructions given by police officers must be obeyed. They take
precedence over all other orders and other rules but do not relieve road users of their
obligation to take due care.
(2) At intersections, the signals have the following meaning:
1. One arm or both arms outstretched horizontally at right angles to the direction of
traffic: “Stop in front of the intersection”.
Cross traffic is allowed to proceed.
If this signal is given, it remains effective for as long as the officer beckons on
traffic in the same direction or merely maintains the basic position. Traffic allowed
to proceed may turn off in accordance with the rules of section 9; it may turn left,
however, only if no rail-borne vehicles are impeded by its doing so.
2. One arm raised upright:
“Wait in front of the intersection for the next signal”;
For road users on the intersection: “Clear the intersection”.
(3) These signals may be supplemented or altered by instructions.
(4) At other places on the road, such as junctions and pedestrian crossings, the
signals have the same meaning.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(5) Police officers may stop road users for the purposes of roadside checks, including
a check of their fitness to drive and for traffic surveys. The signal to stop may also be
given by means of suitable technical devices on the police vehicle, a signalling disc
or a red light. These signals may also be used to stop a road user ahead of the police
vehicle. Road users must comply with the instructions given by police officers.
Section 37 Traffic light signals, lane control signals and green arrow
(1) Light signals take precedence over priority rules and traffic signs regulating
priority. A person operating a vehicle must not stop up to 10 metres in front of a light
signal if this would conceal the signal.
(2) The sequence of traffic light signals is green – amber – red – red and amber
(simultaneously) – green. Red is at the top, amber in the middle and green at the
bottom.
1.

Colours at intersections mean:
Green: “Traffic may proceed”.
Traffic may turn off in accordance with the rules of section 9; it may turn left,
however, only if no rail-borne vehicles are impeded by its doing so.
Green arrow: “Traffic may proceed only in the direction of the arrow”.
A green arrow on the left-hand side after an intersection indicates that
oncoming traffic is signalled to stop by a red light and that vehicles wishing to
turn left may enter or clear the intersection unhindered in the direction of the
green arrow.
Amber: “Wait in front of the intersection for the next signal”. None of these
signals relieves road users of their obligation to take due care.
Red: “Stop in front of the intersection”.
After stopping, traffic may turn right even if red is showing if a sign with a
green arrow on a black background (green arrow) is affixed to the right of the
red light. A person operating a vehicle may turn off only from the right-hand
lane. When doing so, they must take care not to impede or endanger any

17-0336-K 14

Translation

other road users, especially pedestrians and vehicles that are allowed to
proceed.
A black arrow on a red light gives the order to stop, a black arrow on an amber
light to wait for the next signal, in both cases only for the direction in which the
arrow is pointing.
A single-aspect signal with a green arrow allows traffic to turn right when the
light for traffic going straight ahead shows red.
2.

At other places on the road, such as junctions and markings for pedestrian
traffic, light signals have the same meaning.

3.

The sequence of traffic light signals may be limited to amber – red.

4.

A separate light signal may be provided for each of several marked lanes (sign
295, 296 or 340). Special signals, including signals with different phases, may
be provided for rail-borne vehicles; this also applies to regular service buses
and vehicles carrying schoolchildren or disabled persons that have to be
marked with the school bus sign under legislation governing the carriage of
passengers if they use dedicated lanes that other traffic may not use; in
addition, it applies to ambulances, pedal cycles, taxis and buses operating
occasional services if supplementary signs also allow them to use these lanes.

5.

If the light signals apply only to pedestrians or pedal cyclists, this is indicated
by a “pedestrians” or “cycle” symbol. The colour sequence for pedestrians is
green –red– green; it may be the same for pedal cyclists. If green changes to
red while pedestrians are crossing the carriageway, they must continue to do
so as speedily as possible.

6.

A person riding a pedal cycle must obey the light signals controlling vehicular
traffic. In derogation from this, a person cycling on a cycle facility must obey
the special light signals controlling pedal cyclists. At traffic light signals with
cycle facilities without separate light signals controlling pedal cyclists, pedal
cyclists must, until 31 December 2016, continue to obey the light signals
controlling pedestrians if a cycle crossing is adjacent to a pedestrian crossing.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(3) Lane control signals above a lane close the lane to traffic or indicate that it is
available to traffic.
Crossed red diagonal bars mean:
“This lane must not be used”.
A green arrow pointing downwards means:
“This lane is available to traffic”.
A flashing amber arrow pointing diagonally downwards means:
“Change lanes in the direction indicated by the arrow”.
(4) Where light signals control traffic, vehicles may travel alongside each other, even
if the volume of traffic is low.
(5) A person operating a vehicle must not stop on a lane with lane control signals.
Section 38 Flashing blue lights and flashing amber lights
(1) Flashing blue lights together with a siren may only be used in cases of the utmost
urgency in order to save human life, to ward off serious damage to health or danger
to public safety and order, to pursue persons on the run or to protect objects of great
value.
It means:
“All other road users must make way immediately”.
(2) A flashing blue light alone may only be used by those vehicles that are equipped
with such a light and only to warn road users of scenes of accidents or other
incidents, on emergency runs or for escorting vehicles or close formations.
(3) Flashing amber lights warn of danger. They can be stationary or used on vehicles.
Use on vehicles is only permitted to warn road users of road works sites or scenes of
accidents, of vehicles moving unusually slowly or having an abnormal width or length
or with abnormally wide or long loads.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 39 Traffic signs
(1) Given that all road users are themselves responsible for ensuring that they
observe the general and particular rules contained in the present Regulations, traffic
signs giving local instructions are installed only where special circumstances render
this imperative.
(1a) Within built-up areas, road users on roads that are not priority roads (sign 306)
must expect to encounter zones where a 30 kph speed limit is in force (sign 274.1).
(2) Regulations indicated by traffic signs take priority over general traffic rules. Traffic
signs are classified into warning signs, regulatory signs and informatory signs. As
post-mounted signs, they are usually positioned on the right-hand side. If they only
apply to individual marked lanes, they are usually mounted above these lanes.
Additional signs are also traffic signs. Supplementary signs display black symbols,
drawings or worded legends on a white background with a black border, unless
otherwise specified. They are mounted directly, usually below, the sign to which they
refer.
(4) Traffic signs may be mounted on a white backing board. On variable message
signs, the white areas may, in derogation from the signs illustrated below, be black
and the black symbols and the black border may be white if these signs are only
produced by lamps.
(5) Markings and cycle facility markings are also traffic signs. They are normally
white. Only as temporarily applicable markings are they yellow; in this case, they
override the white markings Yellow markings may also take the form of rows of
retroreflective road studs, rows of light-emitting road studs, guide barriers or guide
kerbs. Rows of light-emitting roads studs apply only when they are switched on. All
lines may be replaced by rows of evenly placed retroreflective studs. In traffic-calmed
shopping precincts (section 45(1d)), edge of carriageway markings may also be
designed using different means, in particular by lines of paving setts. Worded
legends and traffic signs on the carriageway warn or remind road users of a mounted
traffic sign.
(6) Traffic signs may also be mounted on a vehicle. They also apply while the vehicle
is moving. They take precedence over the instructions given by fixed traffic signs.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(7) If symbols are shown on traffic signs other than those illustrated in Annexes 1 to 3
to sections 40 to 42, they have the following meaning:

Motor cars and other motor
vehicles with more than two
wheels

Motor vehicles with a maximum
authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes,
including their trailers, and tractor units,
excluding passenger cars, buses and
coaches

Pedal cycles

Pedestrians
crossing

Horse riders

Trams

Buses and coaches

Passenger cars

Goods vehicles towing a
trailer

Motor vehicles
that cannot or
are not
permitted to
exceed 25kph

Motor-assisted bicycles

Horse-drawn
vehicles

Passenger cars
towing a trailer

Motor cycles, including with
sidecars, mopeds and
and motor-assisted bicycles.

Cattle

(8) In particularly hazardous situations, the “cattle crossing” and “horse riders”
symbols and symbols with the following meaning can be provided as warning signs in
accordance with Annex 1:

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Risk of snow or ice
crushed stone

Risk of falling or fallen rocks

Loose chippings,
crushed stone

Opening or swing bridge

Quayside or river bank

Pedestrian crossing

Migratory toad crossing

Insufficient clearance

Low flying
aircraft or
sudden aircraft
noise

(9) The traffic signs and installations illustrated in Annexes 1 to 4 may also be
installed with the alternatives described in the Catalogue of Traffic Signs. The
Catalogue of Traffic Signs is published in the Federal Ministry of Transport Gazette
by the Federal Ministry of Transport, Building and Infrastructure.
(10) To grant privileges to electrically powered vehicles, the following sign

may be installed as the content of a supplementary sign. Electric vehicles are those
vehicles marked in accordance with section 9a(2) and (4), in both cases also in
conjunction with sub-section (5), of the Vehicle Registration and Licensing
Regulations.
Section 40 Warning signs
(1) Warning signs alert road users of the need for special caution, in particular the
need for a reduction in speed because of a potential danger ahead (section 3(1)).

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(2) Outside built-up areas, these signs are generally placed 150 to 200 metres before
hazards. Where the distance is considerably shorter, it may be indicated on a
supplementary sign, such as

(3) Within built-up areas, they are generally placed at a short distance from the
hazard.
(4) A supplementary sign such as

may indicate the length over which the hazard extends.
(5) If a warning sign is placed in advance of a junction, a black arrow on a
supplementary sign points in the direction of the hazard if it is located on the other
road.
(6) General warning signs are shown in Part 1 of Annex 1.
(7) Special warning signs used in advance of crossings on which rail-borne vehicles
have priority are shown in Part 2 of Annex 1.
Section 41 Regulatory signs
(1) Road users must comply with the requirements or prohibitions indicated by the
regulatory signs shown in Annex 2.
(2) Subject to the proviso in the second sentence, regulatory signs are sited at the
place where or from where the instruction is to be complied with. If, in order to
enhance the smooth flow of traffic or road safety, the signs are sited at a certain
distance from the place at which it becomes compulsory to comply with them, this
distance is indicated on a supplementary sign. Other supplementary signs indicate
only general restrictions on these requirements or prohibitions or general exemptions
from them. The special supplementary signs to signs 283, 286, 277, 290.1 and 290.2
can indicate something else, for instance their scope of application.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 42 Informatory signs
(1) Informatory signs give special instructions to enhance the flow of traffic. They can
also give positive instructions or indicate a prohibition.
(2) Road users must comply with the requirements or prohibitions indicated by the
informatory signs shown in Annex 3.
(3) Subject to the proviso in the second sentence, informatory signs are sited at the
place where or from where the instruction is to be complied with. If, in order to
enhance the smooth flow of traffic or road safety, the signs are sited at a certain
distance from the place at which it becomes compulsory to comply with them, this
distance is indicated on a supplementary sign.
Section 43 Traffic installations
(1) Traffic installations are barriers, bollards, guarding equipment and guiding
systems which, with the exception of delineators, guide curbs and guide separators,
have red-and-white stripes. Guide curbs and guide separators perform the function of
a temporarily applicable marking and are yellow. Traffic installations also include
guard rails, parking meters, parking ticket machines, flashing lights and traffic light
signals plus adaptive traffic control systems. Section (39)(1) applies mutatis
mutandis.
(2) Regulations indicated by traffic installations take priority over general traffic rules.
(3) Traffic installations within the meaning of the first sentence of subsection (1) are
shown in Annex 4. Road users must not drive or ride on the road areas marked by
traffic installations (Annex 4, nos 1 to 7).
(4) Officially approved warning markers may be used to mark, in accordance with the
second and third sentences of section 17(4), vehicles and trailers parked on the
carriageway within built-up areas.

III.
Implementing Regulations, Administrative Fines and Final
Provisions

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 44 Technical competence
(1) Unless otherwise provided, the road traffic authorities are responsible for
implementing these Regulations. Under the provisions of the relevant federal state
legislation, the responsibility of the top-level federal state authorities and of the higher
administrative authorities may, in individual cases or generally, be delegated to
another agency.
(2) The police are authorized to regulate traffic by means of signals and instructions
(section 36) and by operating traffic light signals. To maintain the safety and order of
road traffic in cases of imminent danger, the police may function in lieu of the
competent authorities and may take preliminary measures; in this case, the police
shall decide on the measures to be taken to ensure traffic safety and traffic
management.
(3) Permission under section 29(2) and section 30(2) shall be granted by the
competent road traffic authority; if the event extends beyond the district of a road
traffic authority, however, permission shall be granted by the higher administrative
authority; it shall be granted by the top-level federal state authority if the event
extends beyond the administrative area of the higher administrative authority. If the
event affects several federal states, the top-level federal state authority in whose
state the event starts shall be responsible. Under the provisions of the relevant
federal state legislation, the responsibility of the top-level federal state authorities and
of the higher administrative authorities may, in individual cases or generally, be
delegated to another agency.
(3a) Permission under section 29(3) shall be granted by the competent road traffic
authority; however, if there is no consultation, it shall be granted by the higher
administrative authority responsible for approving deviations from dimensions, axle
loads, the maximum authorized mass and the field of vision of a vehicle by way of
exemption; in this case, it shall also be responsible for exemptions under section
46(1)(2) and (5) within the scope of such permission. The same shall apply if these
tasks of the higher administrative authority are performed by another authority.
(4) Agreements concerning the use of roads by military traffic shall be concluded by
the Federal Armed Forces or the forces of the non-German states parties to the

17-0336-K 14

Translation

North Atlantic Treaty with the top-level federal state authority or the agency it
designates.
(5) Where agreements or special arrangements for foreign armed forces have not
been concluded, the higher administrative authorities or the agencies designated
under the relevant federal state legislation shall grant permission for the exceptional
use of roads by the Federal Armed Forces or by the forces of the non-German states
parties to the North Atlantic Treaty; they shall also grant permission for the
exceptional use of roads by the Federal Police, police forces and disaster control
services.
Section 45 Traffic signs and installations
(1) The road traffic authorities may restrict or prohibit the use of certain roads or
sections of road for reasons of safety or to maintain the order of traffic and may divert
traffic. They have the same rights with regard to:
1.

the execution of road works;

2.

the prevention of excessive damage to the road;

3.

the protection of residents against noise and exhaust gas emissions;

4.

the protection of rivers, lakes and mineral springs;

5.

the taking of measures required for the maintenance of public safety; and

6.

the carrying out of studies into the overall accident situation, road user
behaviour, traffic flows and the trialling of planned traffic safety or regulation
measures.

(1a) In addition, they have the same rights:
1.

in spas and health resorts;

2.

in climatic health resorts;

3.

in recreational resorts of special importance;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

4.

in areas of countryside and parts of towns and cities used primarily for
recreational purposes;

4a.

in respect of local measures for the protection of species and biotopes:

4b.

in respect of local measures of a definite duration for the protection of cultural
events that are staged outside the street environment and that may be
seriously affected by road traffic, especially by the noise emitted by this traffic;

5.

in the vicinity of hospitals and sanatoriums; and

6.

in the immediate vicinity of recreational sites outside built-up areas;

if, by doing so, they can prevent nuisances caused by vehicular traffic that would
otherwise be unavoidable.
(1b) The road traffic authorities shall also make the arrangements required:
1.

in connection with the establishment of chargeable car parks for major events;

2.

in connection with the marking of parking facilities for disabled persons
with severe walking difficulties, bilateral amelia or phocomelia or with
comparable functional impairments and for blind persons;

2a.

in connection with the marking of parking facilities for residents of urban
neighbourhoods with a serious lack of parking space, by reserving parking
space, either at all times or at certain times of the day, for those entitled to
park there, or by issuing orders exempting them from parking management
schemes in force;

3.

for the marking of pedestrian precincts and traffic-calmed areas;

4.

for the maintenance of safety and order in these areas; and

5.

for the protection of the population against noise and exhaust gas emissions
or to support sound urban development.

The road traffic authorities shall regulate the provision of parking facilities for
residents, the marking of pedestrian precincts and traffic-calmed areas, and the

17-0336-K 14

Translation

taking of measures for the protection of the population against noise and exhaust gas
emissions or to support sound urban development in agreement with the local
authority concerned.
(1c) In addition, the road traffic authorities shall designate, in agreement with the
local authority, 30 kph zones within built-up areas, especially in residential areas and
areas with a high density of pedestrians and pedal cyclists and where a large number
of persons have to cross the road. The zones thus designated must not include interurban roads (federal highways, regional roads and district roads) or other priority
roads (sign 306). It may only comprise roads without signal controlled intersections or
junctions, lines delimiting traffic lanes (sign 295), lane markings (sign 340) and
mandatory cycle tracks (sign 237, 240, 241 or sign 295 in conjunction with sign 237).
At intersections and junctions within the zone, the right of way rule described in the
first sentence of section 8(1) (vehicles from the right have priority over vehicles from
the left) must always apply. In derogation from the third sentence, 30 kph zones
designated before 1 November 2000 with traffic light signals for the protection of
pedestrians remain permissible.
(1d) In central urban areas with a high pedestrian footfall, where people tend to
spend time rather than just passing through (traffic-calmed shopping precincts), the
maximum permissible speed in a zone may also be less than 30 kph.
(1e) The road traffic authorities shall issue orders relating to the traffic signs and
installations required for the operation of tolled sections of road on the basis of the
traffic sign plan submitted by the concessionaire. The necessary orders shall be
issued no later than three months after receipt of the traffic sign plan.
(1f) To mark the low emission zones stipulated in an air quality action plan or in a
plan for measures to be taken at short notice under section 47(1) or (2) of the Federal
Immission Control Act, the road traffic authority shall issue the orders for the
necessary prohibition of traffic by means of signs 270.1 and 270.2 in conjunction with
the appropriate supplementary sign.
(1g) To grant privileges to electrically powered vehicles, the road traffic authority
shall, with due regard to the requirements set out in section 3(1) of the Electric

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Mobility Act, order the installation of the necessary signs 314, 314.1 and 315 in
conjunction with the appropriate supplementary sign.
(2) For the purpose of carrying out road works and for the prevention of excessive
damage to the road due to its state of repair, the authorities responsible for road
construction under federal state law (highway authority) may – subject to other
measures taken by the road traffic authorities – order bans and restrictions on traffic,
divert traffic and direct it by markings and guiding devices. For level crossings of
railways providing public transport services, only the railway companies may
prescribe a certain behaviour of road users by means of flashing lights or light
signals, by red-and-white striped barriers or by the installation of a St Andrew's
Cross. All requirements and prohibitions shall be indicated by signs and traffic
installations pursuant to the present Regulations.
(3) In all other cases, the road traffic authorities shall decide where and which traffic
signs and traffic installations are to be set up or removed; in the case of road name
signs, however, they may only decide where they are to be installed in the manner
shown by sign 437. The highway authorities shall – subject to other instructions
issued by the road traffic authorities – determine the manner of installation and
design, such as larger sizes and illumination; the decision as to whether delineators
are to be installed shall be taken by them alone. They may also – subject to other
measures taken by the road traffic authorities – put up warning signs if the safety of
traffic is endangered by the condition of the road.
(4) The authorities referred to above may regulate and guide traffic only by means of
traffic signs and traffic installations; in the case governed by paragraph 5 of the
second sentence of subsection (1), however, they may also do so by means of
instructions announced via radio, television, daily newspapers or in any other way, if
the setting-up of traffic signs and installations is not possible under the prevailing
circumstances.
(5) The agency responsible for road construction and maintenance is obliged to
procure, install, maintain, operate, illuminate and remove the traffic signs and traffic
installations; otherwise the owner of the road is be obliged to do so. This also applies
to the illumination of pedestrian crossings ordered by the road traffic authority.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

(6) Prior to the beginning of works affecting road traffic, the contractors must obtain
instructions from the competent authority, as described in subsections (1) to (3), as to
how their road works sites are to be guarded and marked, whether, and if so how,
traffic is to be restricted, guided and regulated, even if the road is only partially
closed, and whether, and if so how, road closures and diversions are to be marked;
the building contractors must also submit a traffic sign plan. The contractors must
follow these instructions and operate traffic light signals.
(7) If roads are marked as priority roads or as diversion routes, road works narrowing
the carriageway require the approval of the road traffic authority, with the exception of
routine road maintenance and emergency measures. Approval shall be deemed to
have been granted if the authority has not expressed its views on the road works
within one week after receipt of the request.
(7a) The crews of vehicles used for breakdown and recovery services and for the
preparation of towing operations may, if danger is imminent, place traffic cones (sign
610) at the site of the breakdown for their own safety, to protect the broken-down
vehicle and to ensure the safety of other traffic.
(8) Within built-up areas, the road traffic authorities may increase the maximum
permissible speed on certain roads by using sign 274. Outside built-up areas, they
may – with the consent of the competent top-level federal state authorities – raise the
maximum permissible speed under section 3(3)(2) to 120 kph by using sign 274.
(9) Orders for the use of traffic signs and traffic installations shall be issued only
where special circumstances render this imperative. Warning signs may be installed
only where this is necessary to ensure traffic safety because even an alert road user
cannot recognize the danger, or cannot recognize it in good time, and cannot be
expected to anticipate it. In particular, restrictions and prohibitions may be imposed
on moving traffic only if, as a result of special local circumstances, there exists a
dangerous situation which far exceeds the general risk of an impairment of the
objects of legal protection mentioned in the subsections above. The third sentence
does not apply to:
1. advisory cycle lanes (sign 340);
2. cycle-only roads (sign 244.1);

17-0336-K 14

Translation

3. special paths and tracks outside built-up areas (sign 237, sign 240, sign 241) or
cycle lanes within built-up areas (sign 237 in combination with sign 295);
4. 30 kph zones referred to in subsection (1c);
5. traffic-calmed shopping precincts referred to in subsection (1d);
6. 30 kph speed limits on stretches of road within built-up areas (sign 274) referred
to in the first sentence of subsection (1) on inter-urban roads (federal highways,
regional roads and district roads) or on other priority roads (sign 306) in the
immediate vicinity of nursery schools, child day care centres, general education
schools, special needs schools, old people's homes, nursing homes or hospitals.
In addition, the third sentence does not apply to restrictions and prohibitions imposed
on moving traffic by the first sentence of subsection (1) or paragraph 3 of the second
sentence of subsection (1) to remedy or mitigate serious impacts of changes to traffic
conditions resulting from the levying of tolls under the Federal Trunk Road Toll Act.
Nor does the third sentence apply to the marking of the low emission zones referred
to in subsection (1f) stipulated in an air quality action plan or in a plan for measures
to be taken at short notice under section 47(1) or (2) of the Federal Immission Control
Act.
(10) Subsection (9) does not apply if orders are issued to install traffic signs that may
be used to promote electric mobility under the Electric Mobility Act.
Section 46 Exemptions and permission
(1) In particular cases or generally, the road traffic authorities may grant, to certain
applicants, exemptions from:
1.

the provisions governing the use of roads (section 2);

2.

the prohibition of walking on a motorway or motor road or of driving on them
with vehicles that are not allowed to use these road categories (section 18(1)
and (9));

3.

the prohibitions of stopping and parking (section 12(4));

17-0336-K 14

Translation

4.

the prohibition of parking in front of or opposite entrances to and exits from
properties (section 12(3)(3));

4a.

the provision stating that road users may park at parking meters only when
they are in operation, and at parking ticket machines only with a pay-anddisplay ticket (section 13(1));

4b.

the provision stating that road users may park in a no waiting zone (sign 290.1
and 290.2) only during the hours indicated (section 13(2));

4c.

the provisions governing the towing of vehicles (section 15a);

5.

the provisions governing the height, length and width of vehicles and loads
(second sentence of section 18(1), section 22(2) to (4));

5a .

the prohibition on the carriage of persons where this is not permissible (section

21);
5b .

the provisions governing the use of seat belts and the wearing of safety
helmets (section 21a);

6.

the prohibition of leading animals from motor vehicles and animals other than
dogs from pedal cycles (third and fourth sentences of section 28(1));

7.

the ban on driving on Sundays and public holidays (section 30(3));

8.

the prohibition of taking obstacles onto the road (section 32(1));

9.

the prohibitions of using loudspeakers and offering goods or services on the
road (section 33(1)(1) and (2));

10.

the prohibition of displaying advertisements and publicity in combination with
traffic signs (second sentence of section 33(2)), but only for the spaces of
illuminated columns on which public transport stop signs are mounted;

11.

the prohibitions or restrictions based on regulatory signs (Annex 2),
informatory signs (Annex 3), traffic installations (Annex 4) or instructions
(section 45(4));

17-0336-K 14

Translation

12.

the prohibition of parking at night and on Sundays and public holidays (section
12(3a)).

Exemptions from the prohibition of carrying passengers on the load area or in load
compartments of goods vehicles (section 21(2)) may be granted for the services of
the Federal Armed Forces, of the international headquarters established on the basis
of the North Atlantic Treaty, the Federal Police and the police forces by their
respective competent authorities, and for disaster control services by the appropriate
authorities of the individual federal states. The same applies to the provision
governing the compulsory wearing of seat belts or protective helmets (section 21a).
(1a) To grant privileges to electrically powered vehicles in general , the road traffic
authorities may, by means of supplementary signs, allow exemptions from traffic
restrictions, traffic prohibitions or diversions referred to in section 45(1)(3), section
45(1a) and section 45(1b)(5), first alternative. They have the same rights with regard
to the use of bus lanes by electrically powered vehicles. The requirements set out in
section 3(1) of the Electric Mobility Act are to be observed.
(2) The competent top-level federal state authorities or the agencies designated
under the relevant federal state legislation may grant exemptions from all the
provisions of the present Regulations for certain applicants, either for specific
individual cases or generally. In addition, they may grant exemptions from the ban on
driving on Sundays and public holidays (section 30(3)) for specific roads or road
sections if this is necessary on account of differences with regard to public holidays in
the individual federal states (section 30(4)). If the effects of an exemption extend
beyond one federal state and if a uniform decision is required, the Federal Ministry of
Transport and Digital Infrastructure is the competent authority; this does not apply to
exemptions from the prohibition of racing events (section 29(1)).
(3) Exemptions and permission may be granted subject to revocation and secondary
provisions (conditions, time limits, requirements). If necessary, the competent
authority may demand the presentation of an expert opinion at the expense of the
applicant.
Road users shall carry the exemptions and permits with them and present them to
authorized persons if requested to so. In the case of permits granted under section

17-0336-K 14

Translation

29(3) and exemptions granted under section 46(1)(5), it shall be sufficient for road
users to carry with them faxed documents or printouts of permits or exemptions
granted and signed electronically and their digitized form on a storage medium
provided that this digitized form is such that it can be made readable if requested by
authorized persons in the event of a check.
(4) Exemptions and permits issued by the competent authority are valid within the
scope of application of the present Regulations unless they state another scope of
application.
Section 47 Local competence
(1) Permission under section 29(2) and section 30(2) for an event beginning abroad
shall be granted by the authority competent pursuant to section 44(3) in whose
sphere of responsibility the border crossing point is located. This authority shall also
be responsible if other movements requiring permission begin abroad. Permission
under section 29(3) shall be granted by the road traffic authority in whose district the
movement requiring permission begins, or by the road traffic authority in whose
district the applicant has their residence, their place of business or a branch office.
(2) The following authorities are responsible for the granting of exemptions:
1.

pursuant to section 46(1)(2), the road traffic authority in whose district the
vehicles are to join the motorway or motor road for an exemption from
section 18(1). If, however, permission under section 29(3) or an
exemption under section 46(1)(5) is to be granted, the administrative
authority granting this permission or exemption is responsible;

2.

pursuant to section 46(1)(4a) for persons of small stature and pursuant to
section46(1)(4a) and (4b) for persons without hands, the road traffic
authority in whose district the applicant’s residence is located, also for
areas outside its district;

3.

pursuant to section 46(1)(4c), the road traffic authority in whose district
the applicant has their residence, their place of business or a branch
office;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

4.

pursuant to section 46(1)(5), the road traffic authority in whose district the
movement requiring permission begins, or the road traffic authority in
whose district the applicant has their residence, their place of business or
a branch office;

5.

pursuant to section 46(1)(5b), the road traffic authority in whose district
the applicant has their residence, also for areas outside its district;

6.

pursuant to section 46(1)(7), the road traffic authority in whose district
goods are to be loaded, or the road traffic authority in whose district the
applicant has their residence, their place of business or a branch office.
They are also responsible for authorizing the journey by an empty vehicle
to the place of loading, and also if, in their federal state, the special
permit is not made use of or if the driving ban does not apply there;

7.

pursuant to section 46(1)(11), the road traffic authority in whose district
the prohibitions, restrictions and instructions have been issued; in the
case of disabled persons, however, any road traffic authority, including
for those measures in force outside its district;

8.

in all other cases, the road traffic authority in whose district the
exemption is to be made use of.

(3) Permission for the exceptional use of roads by the Federal Armed Forces, the
forces referred to in section 35(5), the Federal Police, the police forces and disaster
control services shall be granted by the higher administrative authority or the agency
designated under the relevant federal state legislation in whose district the movement
requiring permission begins.
Section 48 Remedial training
Anyone failing to observe traffic rules shall, on receipt of a summons from the road
traffic authority or from officials designated by it, be obliged to attend a training
course on road user behaviour.
Section 49 Administrative offences
(1) Anyone violating, either deliberately or negligently, a provision governing:

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1.

general road user behaviour, pursuant to section 1(2);

2.

the use of the road by vehicles, pursuant to section 2(1) to (3a), the first, fifth
or sixth sentence of section 2(4) or section 2(5);

3.

speed, pursuant to section 3;

4.

the distance between vehicles, pursuant to section 4;

5.

overtaking, pursuant to section 5(1) or (2), section (5)(3)(1), section 5(3a) to
(4a), the second sentence of section 5(5), section 5(6) or (7);

6.

passing, pursuant to section 6;

7.

the use of left-hand lanes, pursuant to the first sentence of section 7(3a), also
in conjunction with the second sentence of section 7(3b), the third sentence of
section 7(3c), or lane changing, pursuant to section 7(5);

7a.

behaviour on deceleration lanes, pursuant to section 7a(3);

8.

the right of way, pursuant to section 8;

9.

turning off, making U-turns or reversing, pursuant to section 9 (1), the second
or third sentence of section 9(2) or section 9(3) to (5);

10.

entering the road or moving off, pursuant to the first or second sentence of
section 10;

11.

behaviour in special traffic situations, pursuant to section 11(1) or (2);

12.

stopping or parking, pursuant to section 12 (1), section 12 (3), the first
sentence of section 12(3a), the first sentence of section 12(3b), the first
sentence, second clause of the second sentence, third or fifth sentence of
section 12(4), or section 12(4a) to (6);

13.

parking meters, pay-and-display tickets or parking discs, pursuant to section
13(1) or (2);

14.

the obligation to take care when getting into or out of a vehicle, pursuant to
section 14;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

15.

vehicle breakdowns, pursuant to section 15;

15a.

the towing of vehicles pursuant to section 15a;

16.

the giving of warning signals, pursuant to section 16;

17.

the lighting of vehicles and the parking of unlit vehicles, pursuant to section
17(1) to (4), the first sentence of section 17(4a), section 17(5) or (6);

18.

the use of motorways and motor roads, pursuant to section 18(1) to (3), the
second sentence of section 18(5) or section 18(6) to (11);

19.

behaviour
a) at level crossings, pursuant to paragraph 2 or 3 of the first sentence of
section 19(1), the second or third sentence of section 19(1), or the first
sentence of section 19(2), also in conjunction with the second sentence of
section 19(2), or section 19(3) to (6), or
b) at and on the approach to public transport stops and school bus stops,
pursuant to section 20;

20.

the carriage of passengers, pursuant to the fourth sentence of section 21(1),
the first sentence of section 21(1a), also in conjunction with paragraph 2 of the
second sentence of section 21(1a), the first, fourth or sixth sentence of section
21(2) or the first or second sentence of section 21(3);

20a.

the wearing of seat belts, pursuant to the first sentence of section 21a(1), or
the wearing of protective helmets, pursuant to the first sentence of section
21a(2);

21.

loads, pursuant to section 22;

22.

other obligations of persons operating vehicles, pursuant to section 23(1), the
first sentence of section 23(1a), section 23(1b), the first clause of section
21(2), or section 21(3);

23.

the use of invalid carriages or of wheelchairs other than those referred to in
section 24(1), pursuant to section 24(2);

17-0336-K 14

Translation

24.

25.

behaviour
a)

as a pedestrian, pursuant to section 25(1) to (4);

b)

at pedestrian crossings, pursuant to section 26; or

c)

on bridges, pursuant to section 27(6);

environmental protection, pursuant to section 30(1) or (2), or the ban on
driving on Sundays and public holidays, pursuant to the first or second
sentence of section 30(3) or the second sentence of section 30(3)(4);

26.

sports or games, pursuant to the first sentence of section 31(1) or the third
sentence of section 31(2);

27.

the causing, removal or marking of obstacles to traffic or the effective casing or
sheathing of dangerous equipment, pursuant to section 32;

28.

traffic impairment, pursuant to section 33(1) or (2); or

29.

behaviour following a traffic accident, pursuant to section 34(1)(1), section
34(1)(2), section 34(1)(5) or section 34(1)(6)(b) – if, in the last-named case,
the person concerned waits for a reasonable length of time but does not leave
their name and address at the scene of the accident – or pursuant to section
34(3);

shall be deemed to have committed a traffic offence within the meaning of section 24
of the Road Traffic Act.
(2) In addition, anyone who, either deliberately or negligently:
1.

as the person in charge of a close formation or convoy, in contravention of
section 27(5), does not ensure that the provisions applicable to close
formations or convoys are observed;

1a.

in contravention of section 27(2), cuts into a close formation;

2.

as the person in charge of a group of children or young people, in
contravention of the fourth sentence of section 27(1), does not ensure that
they use the footway;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

3.

as the owner or keeper of animals or as a person otherwise responsible for
animals, violates a provision of section 28(1) or the second sentence of
section 28(2);

4.

as a horse rider, a person accompanying horses, a drover or person
accompanying livestock, in contravention of section 28(2), violates a traffic rule
or instruction applying to vehicular traffic in general;

5.

as a person operating a motor vehicle, in contravention of section 29(1),
participates in a race;

6.

in contravention of the first sentence of section 29(2), organizes an event or,
as the organizer, in contravention of the third sentence of section 29(2), does
not make sure that the pertinent traffic regulations or special conditions are
observed;

7.

in contravention of section 29(3), drives a vehicle or combination of vehicles
referred to in that subsection;

(3) Likewise, anyone who, either deliberately or negligently:
1.

in contravention of section 36(1) to (4), does not obey a signal or an instruction
or, in contravention of the fourth sentence of section 36(5), a stop signal or a
direction given by a police officer;

2.

violates a provision of section 37 governing behaviour at traffic lights, lane
control signals or when turning right at a green arrow signal;

3.

in contravention of section 38(1), section 38(2) or the third sentence of section
38(3), uses a flashing blue light, a flashing blue light together with a siren or a
flashing amber light or, in contravention of the second sentence of section
38(1), does not immediately make way for emergency vehicles;

4.

in contravention of section 41(1), does not comply with a requirement or
prohibition indicated by regulatory signs and described in column 3 of Annex
2;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

5.

in contravention of section 42(2), does not comply with a requirement or
prohibition indicated by informatory signs and described in column 3 of Annex
3;

6.

in contravention of the second sentence of section 43(3), drives or rides on an
area of road closed to traffic;

7.

violates an instruction prohibiting or restricting traffic announced pursuant to
the second clause of section 45(4);

Finally, anyone who, either deliberately or negligently:
1.

violates the prohibition under the first, second or third sentence of section
35(6) concerning the cleaning of footways;

1a. in contravention of the fourth sentence of section 35(6), does not wear highvisibility clothing;

in contravention of section 35(8), exercises special rights

without having due regard to public safety and order;
2.

in contravention of section 45(6), starts work without previously obtaining
instructions, does not observe these instructions or does not operate traffic
light signals;

3.

in contravention of the first sentence of section 46(3), does not observe an
enforceable condition of the exemption or permission;

4.

in contravention of the third sentence of section 46(3), also in conjunction with
the fourth sentence, does not carry with them the notices of exemption or
permission, printouts or a digitized version thereof or fails to present them or
make them visible when requested to do so;

5.

in contravention of section 48, does not follow a summons to attend a remedial
training course;

6.

in contravention of section 50, operates a motor vehicle or rides a pedal cycle
on the island of Helgoland;

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Section 50 Special regulation for the island of Helgoland
The operation of motor vehicles and the riding of pedal cycles are prohibited on the
island of Helgoland.
Section 51 Special cost regulation
In derogation from section 5b(1) of the Road Traffic Act, the costs of signs 386.1,
386.2 and 386.3 shall be borne by the person requesting their installation.
Section 52 Transitional and final provisions
As of midnight on 31 December 2026, the following shall no longer be applied:
1.

section 39(10);

2.

section 45(1g);

3.

section 46(1a)

4.

Annex 2 no 25 column 3 no 4 and nos 25.1, 27.1, 63.5 and 64.1

5.

Annex 3 no 7 column 3 no 3, no 8 column 3 no 4, no 10 column 3 no 3 and no
11 column 3

Section 53 Entry into force, termination
(1) The present Regulations shall enter into force on 1 April 2013.
(2) The Road Traffic Regulations of 16 November 1970 (Federal Law Gazette I, p,
1565; 1971 I, p. 38), most recently amended by Article I of the Regulations of 1
December 2010 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 1737), shall cease to be effective on the
day specified in subsection (1) with the following provisos:
1.

Traffic signs in the form as contained in the version of the present Regulations
applicable until 1 July 1992 shall continue to be valid.

2.

For buses and coaches that were first put on the road before 8 December
2007, section 18(5)(3) shall continue to be applied in the version in force
before 8 December 2007.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

3.

Supplementary signs to sign 220 which, under the provisions applicable until 1
April 2013, permitted pedal cyclists to use the road in the opposite direction if,
on a one-way street with a low volume of traffic, the maximum permissible
speed is limited by traffic signs to 30 kph or less, shall remain valid until 1 April
2017.

4.

Signs 150, 153, 353, 380, 381, 388 and 389 installed before 1 April 2013 shall
remain valid until 31 October 2022.

5.

Signs 311 that are already installed and whose upper part is white if the
locality indicated belongs to the same municipality as the locality that has just
been passed through shall remain valid.

Final clause
The Bundesrat has given its consent.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

Annex 1 (to section 40(6) and (7)
General and special warning signs
(Source: Federal Law Gazette I 2013, pp. 390, 393)

1
Serial

2

3

Sign

Explanations

no.
1

Sign 101

A supplementary sign may specify the nature of the
danger.

Danger spot
2

Sign 102

Intersection or junction with traffic coming from the
right having priority

Intersection or junction
3

Sign 103

Bend
4

Sign 105

Double bend
5

Sign 108

Steep hill downwards

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign

Explanations

no.
6

Sign 110

Steep hill upwards
7

Sign 112

Uneven road
8

Sign 114

Danger of vehicles skidding when road is wet or
soiled

Slippery road
9

Sign 117

Side winds
10

Sign 120

Road narrows on both sides
11

Sign 121

Road narrows on one side

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign

Explanations

no.
12

Sign 123

Road works ahead
13

Sign 124

Traffic queues likely ahead
15

Sign 131

Traffic light signals
16

Sign 133

Pedestrians
17

Sign 136

Children
18

Sign 138

Pedal cycles

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign

Explanations

no.
19

Sign 142

Wild animals
Part 2 Special warning signs used in advance of crossings on which rail-borne vehicles have
priority (section 40(7))

20

Sign 151
Level crossing

21

Sign 156

Level crossing with countdown marker with three
bars around 240 metres before the level crossing. If
the distances are significantly different, this may be
indicated in black digits above the sloping bars on

Level crossing with countdown
marker with three bars
22

Sign 159

the countdown markers with three, two and one
bars.
Countdown marker with two bars around 160 m
before the level crossing

Countdown marker with two bars
23

Sign 162

Countdown marker with one bar around 80 m
before the level crossing

Countdown marker with one bar

Annex 2 (to section 41(1))
Regulatory signs
(Source: Federal Law Gazette I 2013, pp. 394, 410)

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
Part 1 Waiting and stopping requirements

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
1

Sign 201

Requirement or prohibition
1.

A person operating a vehicle must give way
to rail traffic.

2.
St Andrew's Cross

A person operating a vehicle must not stop
up to 10 metres in front of this sign if this
would conceal the sign.

3.

A person operating a vehicle must not park:
a) up to 5 metres before and after this sign
within built-up areas (signs 310 and
311);
b) up to 50 metres before and after this
sign outside built-up areas.

4.

A supplementary sign with a black arrow
indicates that the St Andrew's Cross applies
only to road traffic moving in the direction of
this arrow.

Explanation
This sign (which may also be mounted horizontally)
is placed ahead of the level crossing, usually
immediately in front of it. A lightning arrow in the
centre of the St Andrew’s Cross indicates that the
railway line has an electrified overhead cable.
2

Sign 205
Give way

Requirement or prohibition
1.

A person operating a vehicle must give way.

2.

A person operating a vehicle must not stop
up to 10 metres in front of this sign if this
would conceal the sign.

Explanation
This sign is placed immediately before an
intersection or junction. It may be indicated in
advance by the same sign with a supplementary
sign stating the distance.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
2.1

Requirement or prohibition
If this supplementary sign is used together with
sign 205, it means:
A person operating a vehicle must give way to other
traffic while watching out for pedal cyclists
approaching from the left and right.
Explanation
The supplementary sign is mounted above sign
205.

2.2

Requirement or prohibition
If this supplementary sign is used together with sign
205, it means:
A person operating a vehicle must give way to
trams.
Explanation
The supplementary sign is mounted above sign
205.

3

Sign 206

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must stop and
give way.
2. A person operating a vehicle must not stop up

Stop and give way

to 10 metres in front of this sign if this would
conceal the sign.
3. If there is no stop line (sign 294), they must
stop at a place from which they have an
unobstructed view of the other road.

3.1

Explanation
When used together with sign 205, this
supplementary sign indicates the distance to the
requirement to stop.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
3.2

Requirement or prohibition
If this supplementary sign is used together with
sign 206, it means:
A person operating a vehicle must stop and give
way while watching out for pedal cyclists
approaching from the left and right.
Explanation
The supplementary sign is mounted above sign
206.

Re 2

Explanation

and 3.

When used together with sign 205 or 206, this
supplementary sign illustrates the course of the
priority route (priority route turns right or left at a
junction).

4

Sign 208

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must give way to
oncoming vehicles.

Give priority to vehicles from
opposite direction
Part 2 Prescribed directions of travel

Re 5

Requirement or prohibition

to 7

A person operating a vehicle must proceed in the
direction indicated by the arrow(s).
Explanation
Directions other than those shown are indicated
correspondingly. Reference is made to serial no 70
in Annex 2.
Sign 209

Turn right ahead

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
6

Sign 211

Turn right here
7

Sign 214

Ahead or right
8

Sign 215

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must proceed
around the roundabout in the direction
indicated by the arrows.

Roundabout

2. A person operating a vehicle must not cross
the central island of the roundabout. The only
vehicles exempt from this prohibition are those
which, because of their dimensions, would
otherwise be unable to use the roundabout.
They may be driven across the central island
and edge of carriageway marking if this does
not pose any danger to other road users.
3. Vehicles must not stop on the carriageway
when on the roundabout.

9

Sign 220

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle may use a one-way
street only in the direction indicated by the arrow.
Explanation

One-way street

This sign prescribes the direction of travel for
vehicular traffic on the carriageway.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
9.1

Requirement or prohibition
If this supplementary sign is used together with sign
220, this means:
A person operating a vehicle must, when turning
into and proceeding along a one-way street, watch
out for pedal cyclists travelling against the traffic
flow.
Explanation
This supplementary sign indicates that pedal
cyclists may ride in the opposite direction. When
passing a one-way street on which two-way cycling
is permitted, the principle that vehicles coming from
the right have the right of way (first sentence of
section 8(1)) remains unaffected with regard to
pedal cyclists emerging from the street. The also
applies to pedal cyclists emerging from the street. If
a one-way street on which two-way cycling is
permitted joins a priority route, pedal cyclists
emerging from the one-way street are controlled by
sign 205.

Part 3 Prescribed direction of passing

10

Sign 222

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must pass on the side
indicated by the arrow.
Explanation

Keep right

“Keep left” is indicated correspondingly.

Part 4 Use of the hard shoulder as a traffic lane, public transport stops and taxi ranks

Re 11

Explanation

to 13

If sign 223.1, 223.2 or 223.3 is used for a
carriageway with more than two lanes, the signs
show the appropriate number of arrows.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
11

Sign 223.1

Requirement or prohibition
This sign allows the hard shoulder to be used as a
traffic lane; it must then be used like a right-hand
lane.

Use hard shoulder
11.1

Explanation
Sign 223.1 with this supplementary sign indicates
that use of the hard shoulder as a traffic lane is
about to come to an end.

12

Sign 223.2

Requirement or prohibition
This sign indicates that use of the hard shoulder as
a traffic lane has come to an end.

Discontinue use of hard shoulder
13

Sign 223.3

Requirement or prohibition
This sign instructs road users to rejoin the main
carriageway.

Rejoin main carriageway
14

Sign 224

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not park up to
15 metres before and after this sign.
Explanation

Public transport stop

This sign indicates a stop for regular public
transport services and school buses. This sign with
a supplementary sign bearing the legend
“Schulbus” (school bus) on a common white
backing board and stating the times of day at which
the stop is used) indicates a stop for school buses
only.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
15

Sign 229

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not stop at taxi
ranks; this does not apply to taxis provided for the
carriage of passengers.

Taxi stand

Explanation
The length of the taxi rank is indicated by the
number of taxis for which the rank is designed, or
by this sign placed at the start of the rank with a
horizontal white arrow pointing towards the
carriageway and by this sign placed at the end with
a similar arrow pointing away from the carriageway
or by zig-zag markings (sign 299).

Part 5 Special paths and tracks

16

Sign 237

Requirement or prohibition
1. Pedal cyclists must not use the carriageway;
they must use the cycle track (mandatory use of
cycle tracks).

Cycle track

2. Other road users must not use it.
3. If supplementary signs permit use of a cycle
track by another type of road user, these users
must show consideration for pedal cyclists and
the other vehicular traffic must, if necessary,
adapt its speed to that of the pedal cyclists.
4. This is without prejudice to the sixth sentence of
section 2(4).

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
17

Sign 238

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person riding a horse must not use the
carriageway; they must use the bridle path.
This also applies to persons accompanying

Bridle path

horses (mandatory use of bridle paths).
2. Other road users must not use it.
3. If supplementary signs permit use of a bridle
path by another type of road user, these users
must show consideration for horse riders and
the other vehicular traffic must, if necessary,
adapt its speed to that of the horse riders.

18

Sign 239

Requirement or prohibition
1. Road users other than pedestrians must not
use footways or footpaths.
2. If supplementary signs permit use of a footway

Footway or footpath

or footpath by another type of road user, these
road users must show consideration for
pedestrians. Pedestrians must be neither
endangered nor impeded. If necessary,
vehicular traffic must wait; it may only move at
walking pace.
Explanation
This sign is used to mark a footway or footpath
(first sentence of section 25(1) where clarification is
necessary).

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
19

Sign 240

Requirement or prohibition
1.

Pedal cyclists must not use the carriageway;
they must use the shared route for pedestrians
and pedal cycles (mandatory use of cycle
tracks).

Shared route for pedestrians and
pedal cycles only

2.

Other road users must not use it.

3.

If supplementary signs permit use of a shared
route for pedestrians and pedal cyclists by
another type of road user, these road users
must show consideration for pedestrians and
pedal cyclists. If necessary, vehicular traffic
must adapt its speed to that of the
pedestrians.

4.

This is without prejudice to the sixth sentence
of section 2(4).

Explanation
This sign is also used to mark the footway or
footpath (first sentence of section 25(1)).

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
20

Sign 241

Requirement or prohibition
1. Pedal cyclists must not use the carriageway;
they must use the cycle track of the
segregated track and path for pedal cycles

Segregated track and path for pedal
cycles and pedestrians

and pedestrians (mandatory use of cycle
tracks).
2. Other road users must not use it.
3. If supplementary signs permit use of a
segregated track and path for pedestrians and
pedal cycles by another type of road user,
these road users may only use the track
reserved for pedal cyclists.
4. The other road users must show consideration
for pedal cyclists. If necessary, other vehicular
traffic must adapt its speed to that of the pedal
cyclists.
5. This is without prejudice to the sixth sentence
of section 2(4).
Explanation
This sign is also used to mark the footway or
footpath (first sentence of section 25(1)).

21

Sign 242.1

Requirement or prohibition
1. Road users other than pedestrians must not
use the pedestrian zone.
2. If supplementary signs permit use of a

Start of a pedestrian zone

pedestrian zone by another type of road user,
paragraph 2 to sign 239 applies mutatis
mutandis to vehicular traffic.

22

Sign 242.2

End of a pedestrian zone

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
23

Sign 244.1

Requirement or prohibition
1 . Vehicles other than pedal cycles must not use
cycle-only roads unless this is permitted by
supplementary signs.

Start of a cycle-only road

2 . The maximum speed for vehicular traffic is 30
kph. Pedal cyclists must be neither
endangered nor impeded. If necessary, motor
vehicles must further reduce their speed.
3 . Pedal cyclists may ride two or more abreast.
4 . In all other cases, the rules governing use of
the carriageway and right of way apply.

24

Sign 244.2

End of a cycle-only road
25

Sign 245

Requirement or prohibition
1.

Vehicles other than regular service buses
and vehicles carrying schoolchildren or
disabled persons that have to be marked

Dedicated bus lane

with the school bus sign under legislation
governing the carriage of passengers must
not use dedicated bus lanes.
2.

Ambulances, taxis, pedal cycles and buses
operating occasional services may use a
dedicated bus lane only if this is indicated by
supplementary signs.

3.

Taxis may stop at bus stops (sign 224) to
pick up or set down passengers without
delay.

4.

Electrically powered vehicles may use a
dedicated bus lane only if this is indicated by
a supplementary sign.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
25.1

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign permits electrically
powered vehicles to use a dedicated bus lane.

Part 6 Prohibitions

26

Requirement or prohibition
Signs 250 to 261 (prohibitions) below prohibit use
of the road, either in whole or in part, as indicated
on them.
Explanation
The following applies to signs 250 to 259:
1. Traffic signs of the same kind with symbols
shown in section 39(7) can prohibit other types
of traffic.
2. Two of the following prohibitions may be
combined on one sign.

27

Requirement or prohibition
If a supplementary sign indicates a mass, such as
“7.5 tonnes”, the prohibition only applies to vehicles
whose maximum authorized mass exceeds the
indicated limit.

27.1

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign exempts electrically
powered vehicles from prohibitions (signs 250, 251,
253, 255, 260).

28

Sign 250

Requirement or prohibition
1. The sign does not apply to hand carts; in
derogation from section 28(2), it also does not
apply to horse riders, persons in charge of

No vehicles

horses or livestock and drovers.
2. Motorcycles and pedal cycles may be pushed.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
29

Sign 251

Requirement or prohibition
Passenger cars, goods vehicles and other motor
vehicles with more than two wheels prohibited.

No vehicles except solo motorcycles
30

Sign 253

Requirement or prohibition
Motor vehicles with a maximum authorized mass
exceeding 3.5 tonnes, including their trailers, and
tractor units prohibited. This prohibition does not

No motor vehicles over 3.5 tonnes

17-0336-K 14

apply to passenger cars, buses or coaches.

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
30.1

Requirement or prohibition
If these supplementary signs are used together
with sign 253, this means:
1.

The prohibition is restricted to commercial
vehicle through traffic where the vehicles,
including their trailers, have a maximum
authorized mass exceeding 12 tonnes.

2.

Commercial vehicles are not deemed to be
through traffic if:
a) the purpose of their journey is to reach or
leave premises or land on the road to
which the prohibition applies or on a road
that is accessed via the road to which the
prohibition applies;
b) the purpose of their journey is the carriage
of goods as defined in section (1) of the
Road Haulage Act in an area within a
radius of 75 km, calculated as the crow
flies from the centre of the vehicle’s first
place of loading at the start of its journey
(centre of the locality); all municipalities
whose centre is located within the area
are deemed to be part of the area;
c) they are vehicles referred to in the Federal
Trunk Road Toll Act that are not subject
to tolls.

3.

This prohibition of traffic does not apply to
vehicles using signed diversion routes (signs
421, 442, 454 to 457.2 or signs 460 and 466)
to avoid special traffic situations.

Explanation
This combination may only be used together with
sign 253.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
31

Sign 254

Requirement or prohibition
Riding of pedal cycles prohibited

Riding of pedal cycles prohibited
32

Sign 255

Requirement or prohibition
Riding of motorcycles prohibited, including
motorcycles with sidecars, mopeds and motorassisted bicycles

No motorcycles
33

Sign 259

Requirement or prohibition
Pedestrian traffic prohibited

No pedestrians
34

Sign 260

Requirement or prohibition
Motorcycles (including motorcycles with sidecars,
mopeds and motor-assisted bicycles), passenger
cars, goods vehicles and other motor vehicles with

No motor vehicles
35

Sign 261

more than two wheels prohibited.
Requirement or prohibition
Motor vehicles carrying dangerous goods and
requiring obligatory marking prohibited

Motor vehicles carrying dangerous
goods and requiring obligatory
marking prohibited

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
Re 36

Requirement or prohibition

to 40

Signs 262 to 266 below prohibit use of the road by
vehicles whose dimensions or masses, including
their load, exceed an actual limit indicated on the
sign.
Explanation
The limits indicated here are given by way of
example.

36

Sign 262

Requirement or prohibition
For combinations of vehicles, the restriction
imposed by sign 262 applies to the individual
vehicle; in the case of articulated vehicles, it applies

Actual mass

separately to the towing tractor, including the
vertical load, and to the actual axle loads of the
semi-trailer.

37

Sign 263

Actual axle load
38

Sign 264

Explanation
The actual width indicates the dimension including
the vehicle's exterior mirrors.

Actual width
39

Sign 265

Actual height

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
40

Sign 266

Requirement or prohibition
For combinations of vehicles, this prohibition applies
to the total length.

Actual length
41

Sign 267

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not enter the
carriageway to which this sign applies.
Explanation

No entry for vehicular traffic

This sign is placed on the right-hand side of the
carriageway to which it applies, or on both sides of
this carriageway.

41.1

Requirement or prohibition
If this supplementary sign is used together with sign
267, cyclists may enter the carriageway.

42

Sign 268

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle may use the road only
if their vehicle is fitted with snow chains

Snow chains required
Sign 269

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not use the road
if the vehicle is carrying more than 20 litres of waterpolluting substances.

43
No vehicles carrying loads likely to
cause water pollution

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
44

Sign 270.1

Requirement or prohibition
1.

Use of the road with a motor vehicle within a
zone marked in this way is prohibited.

2.
Start of a zone in which traffic is

This is without prejudice to section 1(2) and
section 2(3) in conjunction with Annex 3 of the

prohibited in order to reduce

Regulations on the marking of motor vehicles

harmful air pollution in a zone

with a low contribution to the pollution level of
10 October 2006 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.
2218), as amended by Article 1 of the
Regulations of 5 December 2007 (Federal Law
Gazette I, p. 2793). Exemptions may be
permitted on a case-by-case basis or generally
by means of supplementary signs or a general
order.
3.

In addition, this prohibition does not apply to
motor vehicles for the carriage of disabled
persons with severe walking difficulties,
bilateral amelia or phocomelia or with
comparable functional impairments and blind
persons.

Explanation
To prevent harmful environmental effects resulting
from air pollutants, a low emission zone is stipulated
in an air quality action plan or a plan for measures
to be taken at short notice under section 47(1) or (2)
of the Federal Immission Control Act and imposed
on the basis of section 40(1) of the Federal
Immision Control Act. The low emission zone is
marked on the basis of section 45(1f).

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
45

Sign 270.2

End of a zone in which traffic is
prohibited in order to reduce
harmful air pollution in a zone
46

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign to sign 270.1 exempts
from the prohibition of traffic motor vehicles
Exemption from the prohibition of
traffic under section 40(1) of the
Federal Immission Control Act

displaying a sticker of the relevant colour, as shown
on the sign, in accordance with section 3 of the
Regulations on the marking of motor vehicles with a
low contribution to the pollution level.

47

Sign 272

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not make a Uturn here.

No U-turns
48

Sign 273

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a motor vehicle with a
maximum authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes
or a tractor unit must observe the minimum

Vehicles must keep a minimum
distance from the vehicle in front

distance indicated from a motor vehicle of the same
type in front. This does not apply to passenger
cars, buses or coaches.

Part 7 Speed limits and prohibitions of overtaking

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
49

Sign 274

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must not exceed
the maximum speed limit indicated by this
sign.

Maximum permissible speed

2. If, within built-up areas, this sign permits
speeds of more than 50 kph, this applies to all
types of vehicle.
3. Outside built-up areas, the maximum speed
limits applicable to certain types of vehicle
(section 3(3)(2)(a) and (b) and section 18(5))
remain unaffected if a higher speed is
permitted by this sign.
Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign to sign 274 prohibits
operators of vehicles from exceeding the indicated
speed on a wet carriageway.

Sign 274.1

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not, within this
zone, exceed the maximum speed limit indicated by
this sign.

Start of a 30 kph zone

Explanation
In traffic-calmed shopping precincts, this sign can
also be used to impose zonal speed limits of less
than 30 kph.

Sign 274.2

End of a 30 kph zone

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
52

Sign 275

A person operating a vehicle must not do so below
the indicated minimum speed unless road, traffic,
visibility or weather conditions make this necessary.
This sign prohibits vehicles that are unable or not

Minimum speed

permitted to travel as fast from using a lane marked
in this manner.

Re

Requirement or prohibition

53

Signs 276 and 277 below prohibit motor vehicles

and

from overtaking motor vehicles with more than two

54

wheels and motorcycles with sidecars. If a

54

supplementary sign indicates a mass, such as “7.5
tonnes”, the prohibition only applies to vehicles
whose maximum authorized mass, including their
trailers, exceeds the indicated limit.

53

Sign 276

No overtaking by any type of motor
vehicle
54

Sign 277

Requirement or prohibition
Overtaking by motor vehicles with a maximum
authorized mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes, including
their trailers, and by tractor units prohibited. This

No overtaking by motor vehicles
over 3.5 tonnes
54.1

prohibition does not apply to passenger cars, buses
or coaches.
Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign indicates that the
prohibition of overtaking imposed by sign 277 also
applies to motor vehicles over 2.8 tonnes, including
their trailers

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
54.2

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign indicates that the
prohibition of overtaking imposed by sign 277 also
applies to buses and coaches and to passenger
cars towing a trailer.

54.3

Explanation
This supplementary sign to signs 274, 276 or 277
indicates the distance over which a speed limit or a
prohibition of overtaking extends.

55

Explanation
The end of a distance-related speed limit or
prohibition of overtaking is not signed if the
prohibition applies only to a short distance and the
distance over which the prohibition extends is
indicated on a supplementary sign. Nor is it signed if
the prohibition sign is combined with a warning sign
and if the locality does not leave any doubt as to the
point from where the indicated danger ceases to
exist. Otherwise, it is signed by signs 278 to 282.

56

Sign 278

End of maximum speed limit
57

Sign 279

End of minimum speed requirement

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
58

Sign 280

End of prohibition of overtaking by
any type of motor vehicle
59

Sign 281

End of prohibition of overtaking by
motor vehicles over 3.5 tonnes
60

Sign 282

End of all distance-related speed
limits and prohibitions of overtaking
Part 8 Prohibitions of stopping and parking

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
61

Requirement or prohibition
1. The prohibitions of stopping imposed by signs
283 and 286 below apply only on the side of
the road on which the signs are placed. They
apply up to the next intersection or junction on
the same side of the road or until other
instructions are given by traffic signs for
stationary vehicles.
2. Mobile prohibitions of stopping temporarily
imposed by signs 283 and 286 override road
signs that permit parking.
Explanation
The start of the section of road to which the
prohibition applies may be indicated by a horizontal
white arrow on the sign pointing towards the
carriageway, and the end of a prohibition may be
indicated by such an arrow pointing away from the
carriageway. On signs repeated on the section of
road to which the prohibition applies, one
arrowhead points towards the carriageway and the
second arrowhead points away from it.

62

Sign 283

Requirement or prohibition
Stopping on the carriageway is prohibited.

No stopping
62.1

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign used together with sign
283 also prohibits vehicles from stopping on the
verge.

62.2

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign used together with sign
283 prohibits vehicles only from stopping on the
verge.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
63

Sign 286

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must not stop on
the carriageway for longer than three minutes,
except to pick up or set down passengers or

No waiting

for loading or unloading.
2. Loading and/or unloading must be carried out
without delay.

63.1

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign used together with sign
286 also prohibits stopping on the verge for longer
than three minutes, except to pick up or set down
passengers or for loading or unloading.

63.2

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign used together with sign
286 only prohibits stopping on the verge for longer
than three minutes, except to pick up or set down
passengers or for loading or unloading.

63.3

Requirement or prohibition
1. This supplementary sign used together with sign
286 exempts disabled persons with severe
walking difficulties, bilateral amelia or
phocomelia or with comparable functional
impairments and blind persons, in each case
holding disabled parking badge number …, from
the prohibition of waiting.
2. This exemption only applies if the permit is
displayed or affixed such that it is clearly legible.

63.4

Requirement or prohibition
1. This supplementary sign used together with
sign 286 exempts residents holding a special
permit from the prohibition of stopping.
2. This exemption only applies if the permit is
displayed or affixed such that it is clearly
legible.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
63.5

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign to sign 286 permits parking
by electrically powered vehicles within the marked
bays.

64

Sign 290.1

Requirement or prohibition
1.

A person operating a vehicle must not stop on
the carriageway within the marked zone for
longer than three minutes, except to pick up or
set down passengers or for loading or

Start of a no waiting zone

unloading.
2.

Within the marked zone, the prohibition of
waiting applies on all public spaces unless
traffic signs or traffic installations give differing
instructions.

3.

Supplementary signs may permit parking by
residents holding a permit or displaying a payand-display ticket or parking disc (sign 318)
within marked spaces.

4.

Supplementary signs may permit ticket or disc
(sign 318) parking within marked spaces. The
permit, ticket or disc must be displayed or
affixed such that it is clearly legible.

64.1

Requirement or prohibition
This supplementary sign to sign 290.1 permits
parking by electrically powered vehicles within the
marked bays.

65

Sign 290.2
End of no waiting zone

Part 9 Markings

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
66

Sign 293

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not stop on
pedestrian crossings or up to 5 metres before them.

Pedestrian crossing
67

Sign 294

Requirement or prohibition
In addition to the requirements to stop or wait given
by sign 206, by police officers, traffic light signals or
barriers, the stop line imposes the following

Stop line

requirement:
A person operating a vehicle must stop here. If
necessary, they must stop again at the place where
they have a good view of the road into which they
intend to emerge (line of sight)

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
68

Sign 295

Requirement or prohibition
1.
a) A person operating a vehicle must not cross
or straddle the continuous line.

Centre line and edge of carriageway

b) If the continuous line separates the portion

marking

of the carriageway for traffic travelling in
the opposite direction, traffic must keep to
the right of it.
c) If it separates a hard shoulder, agricultural
tractors and machinery, horse-drawn
vehicles and similar slow-moving vehicles
must keep as far to the right of it as
possible.
d) A person operating a vehicle must not park
on the carriageway if, by doing so, there
no longer remains a lane of at least 3
metres between the parked vehicle and
the centre line.
2.
a) A person operating a vehicle must not stop
to the left of a continuous edge of
carriageway marking if there is a verge or
special track on the right.
b) A person operating a vehicle must not cross
the edge of carriageway marking on the
central island of a roundabout.
c) The only vehicles to which the prohibition of
crossing the edge of carriageway marking
on the central island of a roundabout does
not apply are those which, because of their
dimensions, would otherwise be unable to
use the roundabout. They may be driven
across the central island if this does not
pose any danger to other road users.
3.
17-0336-K 14

a) If sign 223.1 indicates that a hard shoulder is

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
c) The edge of carriageway marking may be
crossed if there is an entrance to a
property behind it that it would not
otherwise be possible to reach.
Explanation
1. As a centre line, this sign separates the
portion of the carriageway to be used by traffic
travelling in the opposite direction or several
lanes for traffic travelling in the same direction.
To separate traffic travelling in the opposite
direction, the centre line may consist of double
lines.
2. As an edge of carriageway marking, the
continuous line may also separate a verge or
special track.
69

Sign 296

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must not cross or
straddle the continuous line.
2. A person operating a vehicle must not park on

Lane B

Lane A

the carriageway if, by doing so, there no

Double centre line comprising one

longer remains a lane of at least 3 metres

continuous and one broken line

between the parked vehicle and the
continuous centre line.
3. For vehicles travelling in lane B, the marking
indicates:
Vehicles travelling in lane B may cross the
marking if they do not endanger traffic by doing
so.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
70

Sign 297

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must follow the
direction at the intersection or junction ahead if
there are lane markings (sign 340) or centre

Arrows

lines (sign 295) between the arrows.
2. A person operating a vehicle must not stop on
the section of carriageway marked with arrows
(section 12(1)).
Explanation
Arrows advise road users to get into the correct lane
in good time and to move alongside one another.
Vehicles that have already got into the correct lanes
may also be overtaken on the right.

71

Sign 297.1

Explanation
Mit dem Vorankündigungspfeil wird eine
The deflection arrow is used to warn of an
approaching centre line or to indicate the end of a

Advance warning arrow

traffic lane. The design of the arrow may differ from
that shown.

72

Sign 298

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not use these
areas.

Area not available to traffic
73

Sign 299

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not stop or park
within a zig-zag marking indicating a no stopping or
no parking area. Explanation

Zig-zag marking indicating a no
stopping or no parking area

Zig-zag markings indicate, extend or shorten a
prohibition of stopping or parking imposed
elsewhere.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1
Serial

2

3

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Explanations

no.
74

Marking identifying parking places Requirement or prohibition
A marking identifying parking places permits
parking; on footways, however, only vehicles with a
maximum authorized mass not exceeding 2.8
tonnes may be parked. Vehicles must be parked in
the manner indicated by the marking Where the
marking comprises continuous lines, these lines
may be crossed.
Explanation
If parking places on roads are visibly divided into
separate bays, this indicates how vehicles are to be
parked.

Annex 3 (to section 42(2))
Informatory signs
(Source: Federal Law Gazette I 2013, pp. 411, 424)

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

Part 1 Priority signs

1

Sign 301

Requirement or prohibition
This sign indicates priority at the next
intersection or junction.

Right of way
2

Sign 306

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle must not park on
carriageways of priority routes outside built-up
areas. This sign indicates priority until the next

Priority road

sign 205 (“Give way”), 206 (“Stop and give way”)
or 307 (“end of the priority route”).

2.1

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle and wishing
to follow the course of a priority route
turning right or left at a junction must

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
indicate this clearly and in good time, using
their vehicle’s direction indicators to do so.
2. They must show particular consideration
towards pedestrians. If necessary, they
must wait.
Explanation
This supplementary sign to sign 306 indicates
the course of the priority route.

3

Sign 307

End of priority road
4

Sign 308

Requirement or prohibition
A person operating a vehicle has priority over
oncoming vehicles.

Priority over oncoming vehicles
Part 2 Boundary signs

Re 5

Explanation

and

Starting at the boundary sign, the rules governing

6.

traffic within or outside built-up areas apply.

5

Sign 310

This boundary sign indicates the start of a builtup area.

Boundary sign (front)
6

Sign 311

This boundary sign indicates the end of a built-up
area.

Boundary sign (rear)
Part 3 Parking

7

17-0336-K 14

Sign 314

Requirement or prohibition

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
1 . A person operating a vehicle may park here.
2.
a) A supplementary sign may restrict

Parking

parking, in particular with regard to a time
limit or types of vehicle, or limiting it to
residents holding a permit or to vehicles
displaying a pay-and-display ticket or
parking disc.
b) A supplementary sign showing figure 318
(parking disc) and stating the number of
hours indicates the requirement that
vehicles must display a parking disc and
the maximum duration for which they
may be parked.
c) A supplementary sign may exempt
residents holding a special permit from
the requirement to display a pay-anddisplay ticket or parking disc.
d) A supplementary sign showing the
wheelchair symbol may restrict parking to
disabled persons with severe walking
difficulties, bilateral amelia or phocomelia
or with comparable functional
impairments and blind persons.
e) Permission to park only applies if the payand-display ticket, parking disc or special
permit is displayed or affixed such that it
is clearly legible.
f) A supplementary sign may designate a
parking place as chargeable.
3.
a ) A supplementary sign may restrict parking
to electrically powered vehicles.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
b ) A supplementary sign may exempt
electrically powered vehicles from the
requirement to display a pay-and-display
ticket or parking disc.
c ) A supplementary sign may impose a time
limit on parking for electrically powered
vehicles. Proof of compliance with the
time limit must be furnished by displaying
a parking disc. Permission to park only
applies if the parking disc is displayed or
affixed such that it is clearly legible.
Explanation
1 . The start of the section of road on which
parking is permitted may be indicated by a
horizontal white arrow on the sign pointing
towards the carriageway, and the end may be
indicated by such an arrow pointing away from
the carriageway. On signs repeated on the
section of road, one arrowhead points towards
the carriageway and the second arrowhead
points away from it.
2 . When used together with a supplementary
sign showing a black arrow, this sign indicates
access to large parking areas or multi-storey car
parks. The sign may also contain a legend
indicating whether the parking place is a multistorey car park. Sign 314.1Start of a parking
management zone
Sign 314.1

Requirement or prohibition
1.

A person operating a vehicle may only park
within a parking management zone if they
display a pay-and-display ticket or parking

Start of a parking management zone

17-0336-K 14

disc (figure 318), provided that stopping

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
and parking are not prohibited by law or by
traffic signs.
2.

A supplementary sign may exempt
residents holding a special permit from the
requirement to display a pay-and-display
ticket or parking disc.

3.

Permission to park only applies if the payand-display ticket, parking disc or special
permit is displayed or affixed such that it is
clearly legible.

4.
a) A supplementary sign may restrict parking
to electrically powered vehicles.
b) A supplementary sign may exempt
electrically powered vehicles from the
requirement to display a pay-anddisplay ticket or parking disc.
c) A supplementary sign may impose a time
limit on parking for electrically powered
vehicles. Proof of compliance with the
time limit must be furnished by
displaying a parking disc. Permission to
park only applies if the parking disc is
displayed or affixed such that it is clearly
legible.
Explanation
The nature of the parking restriction is indicated
by a supplementary sign.
9

Sign 314.2

End of a parking management zone

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.
10

Explanations
Sign 315
Footway parking

Requirement or prohibition
1 . A person operating a vehicle must not park
vehicles with a maximum authorized mass
exceeding 2.8 tonnes on footways. They
must also comply with the type of parking
indicated by the sign and with any
restrictions imposed by supplementary signs.
2.
a) A supplementary sign may restrict
parking, in particular with regard to a time
limit or types of vehicle, or limiting it to
residents holding a permit or to vehicles
displaying a pay-and-display ticket or
parking disc.
b) A supplementary sign showing figure 318
(parking disc) and stating the number of
hours indicates the requirement that
vehicles must display a parking disc and
the maximum duration for which they
may be parked.
c) A supplementary sign may exempt
residents holding a special permit from
the requirement to display a pay-anddisplay ticket or parking disc.
d) A supplementary sign showing the
wheelchair symbol may restrict parking
to disabled persons with severe walking
difficulties, bilateral amelia or
phocomelia or with comparable
functional impairments and blind
persons.
e) Permission to park only applies if the payand-display ticket, parking disc or
special permit is displayed or affixed

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
such that it is clearly legible.
3.
a) A supplementary sign may restrict parking
to electrically powered vehicles.
b) A supplementary sign may exempt
electrically powered vehicles from the
requirement to display a pay-and-display
ticket or parking disc.
c) A supplementary sign may impose a time
limit on parking for electrically powered
vehicles Proof of compliance with the
time limit must be furnished by displaying
a parking disc. Permission to park only
applies if the parking disc is displayed or
affixed such that it is clearly legible.
Explanation
1 . The start of the section of road on which
parking is permitted may be indicated by a
horizontal white arrow on the sign pointing
towards the carriageway, and the end may
be indicated by such an arrow pointing away
from the carriageway. On signs repeated on
the section of road, one arrowhead points
towards the carriageway and the second
arrowhead points away from it.
2 . The symbol on the sign illustrates how
vehicles are to be parked.

11

Sign 318

Requirement or prohibition
If parking is only available to electric vehicles for
a limited time, proof must be furnished by
displaying a parking disc.

Parking disc
Part 4 Traffic-calmed area

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

12

Sign 325.1

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must do so at
walking pace.
2. A person operating a vehicle must neither

Start of a traffic-calmed area

endanger nor impede pedestrians; if
necessary, they must wait.
3. Pedestrians must not unnecessarily impede
vehicular traffic.
4. A person operating a vehicle must not park
outside the areas specially marked for this
purpose, except to pick up or set down
passengers or to load or unload goods.
5. Pedestrians may use the road over its
entire width; children are allowed to play
everywhere.

13

Sign 325.2

Explanation
Section 10 must be complied with when leaving
a traffic-calmed area.

End of a traffic-calmed area
Part 5 Tunnel

14

Sign 327

Requirement or prohibition
1.

A person operating a vehicle must, when
passing through a tunnel, use dipped
headlights and must not make a U-turn in
the tunnel.

Tunnel
2.

In the event of an emergency or
breakdown, only the emergency refuge
areas provided are to be used.

Part 6 Emergency refuge area
15

Requirement or prohibition
Sign 328

A person operating a vehicle may only stop in an
emergency refuge area in the event of an

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
emergency or breakdown.

Emergency refuge area
Part 7 Motorways and motor roads (roads for motor vehicles only)

16

Sign 330.1

Explanation
This sign indicates the start of the rules
governing traffic on motorways.

Motorway
17

Sign 330.2

End of the motorway
18

Sign 331.1

Explanation
This sign indicates the start of the rules
governing traffic on motor roads.

Motor road
19

Sign 331.2

End of the motor road
20

Sign 333

Explanation
On motor roads or near motorway standard
roads, the corresponding sign uses black
lettering on a yellow background to indicate the

Motorway exit

exit. The sign may also be designed with a white
background.

21

Sign 450

Explanation
This sign is placed 300 metres, 200 metres (as
illustrated) and 100 metres in advance of all

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
types of motorway junction. It is also placed in
advance of a rest area with services. In advance
of a junction, the number of the junction may be
Countdown marker

shown on the 300 metre marker.

Part 8 Markings

22

Sign 340

Requirement or prohibition
1. A person operating a vehicle must not
cross lane markings if this would endanger
traffic.

Lane marking

2. A person operating a vehicle must not use
advisory cycle lanes marked on the
carriageway by lane markings unless this is
necessary When doing so, they must not
endanger pedal cyclists.
3. A person operating a vehicle must not park
on advisory cycle lanes marked by lane
markings.
Explanation
Advisory cycle lanes are marked with the cycle
symbol at regular intervals on the carriageway.

23

Sign 341

Explanation
The give way line indicates where road users
who are obliged to give way should wait.

Give way line
Part 9 Information

24

Sign 350

Pedestrian crossing
25

17-0336-K 14

Sign 354

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

Water protection zone
Sign 356

School crossing patrol
Sign 357

Explanation
There may be pictograms in the upper portion of
this traffic sign indicating that this is a live-end
cul-de-sac for pedal cyclists and/or pedestrians.

No through road
Re 28

Explanation

and

1. Similar signs with corresponding symbols

29

may also provide other information, for
instance indicating a pedestrian subway or
footbridge, public telephone, emergency
telephone, breakdown and recovery service,
filling stations, camping and caravan sites,
motorway hotel, motorway restaurant,
motorway kiosk.
2. Signs pointing to hotels, restaurants and
kiosks are provided only on motorways and
only if they are motorway facilities or
truckstops.

28

Sign 358

First aid station
29

17-0336-K 14

Sign 363

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

Police
Sign 385

30

Place name sign
Re

Explanation

31

These signs are placed off motorways. They are

and

used to draw road users’ attention to tourist

32.

attractions and to mark tourist routes. They may
also be designed as direction signs.

31

Sign 386.2

Tourist route
32

Sign 386.1

Tourist attraction
33

Sign 386.3

Explanation
This sign is placed on motorways. It is used to
provide information about tourist attractions.

Sign providing information for tourists
34

Sign 390

Tolls payable under the Federal Trunk

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
Road Toll Act

35

Sign 391

Tolled section
36

Sign 392

Customs post
37

Sign 393

Information board at border-crossing
points
38

Sign 394

Explanation
Within built-up areas, lamp-posts are marked by
this sign if the lamps are not lit during the whole
night. The time when the lamp is switched off

Street lamp ring

may be indicated in white letters on the red
background

Part 10 Directions
1. Number signs

39

Sign 401

Federal highways
40

17-0336-K 14

Sign 405

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

Motorways
41

Sign 406

Explanation
These signs are used to number motorway
junctions (exits, intersections and Y-junctions).

Motorway junctions
42

Sign 410

European routes
2. Off-motorway direction signs

a) Advance direction signs
43

Sign 438

44

Sign 439

45

Sign 440

46

Sign 441
b) Flag-type direction signs

Re

Explanation

47 to

A supplementary sign bearing the legend

49

“Nebenstrecke” or the addition of the word
“Nebenstrecke” on the sign indicates a route of
secondary importance.

47

Sign 415

Explanation
Flag-type direction sign on federal highways

48

Sign 418

Explanation
Flag-type direction sign on other highways.

49

Sign 419

Explanation
Flag-type direction sign on minor roads

50

17-0336-K 14

Sign 430

Explanation

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations
Flag-type direction sign pointing to a motorway

51

Sign 432

Explanation
Flag-type direction sign pointing to destinations
of major transport importance
c) Stack-type direction signs

52

Sign 434

Explanation
Stack-type direction signs may also be
consolidated on one panel.
Destinations in one direction may also be shown
on separate panels.
d) Exit sign

53

Sign 332.1

Explanation
Exit from a motor road or a near motorway
standard road. Within built-up areas, the sign
may also be designed with a white background.
e) Road name signs

54

Sign 437

Explanation
This sign has either white lettering on a dark
background or black lettering on a light
background. It may also be mounted on
structures.
3. On-motorway direction signs

a) Advance information signs
Re

Explanation

55

The number (sign 406) is the consecutive

and

number of the motorway exits, motorway

58.

intersections and motorway y-junctions. It is
designed to give road users better directions.

55

Sign 448

Explanation
This sign is placed on the approach to a
motorway exit, motorway intersection or
motorway y-junction. It includes sign 406.

56

Explanation
This symbol refers to an exit.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

57

Explanation
This symbol refers to a motorway interchange or
motorway Y-junction; it also refers to
interchanges and Y-junctions where motorways
cross near motorway standard secondary roads.

58

Sign 448.1

Explanation
1.

This sign is used to provide advance
information about a truckstop in the
immediate vicinity of a motorway exit.

2.

The presence of a truck stop is indicated
once by this sign placed on the right-hand
edge of the carriageway 500 to 1,000
metres before sign 448. A supplementary
sign with graphic symbols shows the
range of services provided at the
truckstop.

b) Advance direction sign
59

Sign 449
c) Exit sign

60

Sign 332
d) Route confirmatory sign

61

Sign 453

Explanation
The route confirmatory sign shows long-range
destinations and the distance to the centre of
each place named. Destinations that can be
reached via a motorway other than the one on
which the sign is located are shown below the
horizontal line.

Part 11 Diversion signs
1. Off-motorway diversion

a) Diversions for specific types of traffic
62

Sign 442

Explanation
Advance direction sign for specific types of traffic

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

Advance direction signs
63

Sign 421

Explanation
Flag-type direction sign for specific types of
traffic

64

Sign 422

Explanation
Direction sign for specific types of traffic
b) Temporary diversions (e.g. as a result of road
works)

65

Explanation
The course of the diversion route may be
indicated by

66

Sign 454

Explanation
a direction sign indicating a diversion route or

67

Sign 455.1

Explanation
a sign indicating continuation of a diversion

Re

Explanation

66

Signs 454 and 455.1 may be augmented by a

and

destination on a plate above the sign. If only

67

specific types of traffic are being diverted, these
are indicated on a supplementary sign above
the sign.

68

Explanation
A temporary diversion ahead may be indicated
by sign 455.1 or

69

Explanation
Sign 457.1
a sign indicating a diversion ahead

70

Explanation
but only if the distance is shown on a
supplementary sign and, if necessary, the
destination is shown on a supplementary plate
above the sign.

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

71

Explanation
A temporary diversion ahead may also be
indicated by

72

a diagram

73

Explanation
The end of a diversion may be indicated by

74

Sign 457.2

Explanation
End of diversion or

75

Sign 455.2

Explanation
End of diversion
2. Permanently signed diversion route for
motorway traffic

76

Sign 460

Explanation
This sign indicates an alternative route on the
non-motorway network between motorway
junctions.

Permanently signed diversion route
Sign 466

Explanation
If diverted traffic cannot be guided back to the
motorway at the junction indicated by sign 460, it
is rerouted further by this sign via the next

Continuation of a permanently signed

permanently signed diversion route.

diversion route
Part 12 Miscellaneous traffic management signs
1. Arrow indicating alternative route

78

Sign 467.1

Explanation
This sign indicates alternative routes on
motorways, use of which is recommended if
necessary (recommended routes).

Arrow indicating alternative route
79

Sign 467.2

Explanation
This sign indicates the end of a recommended
route.
2. Traffic management signs

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign and supplementary sign(s)

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

80

Explanation
Traffic management signs indicate the course
and number of lanes, such as:

81

Sign 501

Explanation
This sign indicates the start of a contraflow
system.

Crossover point
82

Sign 531

Lane ends
82.1

Explanation
This supplementary sign used together with a
lane ends sign indicates the place at which
vehicles are to change lanes using the merge-inturn system (section 7(4)).
3. Alternative route where turning is prohibited

83

Sign 590

Alternative route where turning is
prohibited

Annex 4 (to section 43(3))
Traffic installations
(Source: Federal Law Gazette I 2013, pp. 425, 427)

1

2

3

Serial

Sign

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

Part 1 Installations for marking road works and accident sites or other temporary obstacles

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

1

Sign 600

Barrier plank
2

Sign 605

Guiding marker
Chevron marker
3

Striped marker
Sign 628

Guide curb
with chevron marker

with striped

marker
4

Sign 629

Guide separator
with chevron marker

with striped

marker
5

Sign 610

Traffic cone

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign

Requirement or prohibition

no.

Explanations

6

Sign 615

Mobile road works warning sign
7

Sign 616

Mobile road works warning sign with
flashing arrow
Re

Requirement or prohibition

1 to

These installations mark an area of road closed

7

to traffic and guide traffic past this area.
Explanation
1. Warning lamps on these installations show a
red light if the entire carriageway is closed;
otherwise an amber light or flashing amber
light is used.
2. Together with the mobile road works warning
sign, rumble strips laid transversely across
the carriageway before the mobile road
works warning sign may be used.

Part 2 Installations to mark permanent obstacles or other hazards

8

Sign 625

The sign indicating a sharp deviation of route
can also be installed as a series of single
chevrons.

Sign indicating sharp deviation of route
9

Sign 626

Hazard marker

17-0336-K 14

Translation

1

2

3

Serial

Sign

Requirement or prohibition

no.
10

Explanations
Sign 627

Obstruction markers are usually used to identify
objects restricting traffic. Their design depends
on whether they are mounted vertically,
horizontally or in a curved manner, for instance

Obstruction marker

on structures, parts of buildings and scaffolding.

Part 3 Installations to mark the course of the road

Sign 620

To mark the course of the road, delineators can
be installed along the sides of the road, usually
at intervals of 50 metres, and at shorter

11

intervals on bends.
Delineators
(left)

(right)

Part 4 Warning marker to mark vehicles and trailers during the hours of darkness

12

Sign 630

Warning marker for parked vehicles

17-0336-K 14

