Travel & Driving Guide

Italy

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

Index
Contents

Page

Tips and Road Signs in Italy

3

Driving Laws and Insurance for Italy

4

Road Signs, Tolls, driving
Requirements for Italy

5

Car Rental FAQ’s

6-7

Italy Regions at a Glance

7

Touring Guides
Rome Guide

8-9

Northwest Italy Guide

10-11

Northeast Italy Guide

12-13

Central Italy

14-16

Southern Italy

17-18

Sicily and Sardinia

19-20

Getting Into Italy

21

Accommodation

22

Climate, Language and Public Holidays

23

Health and Safety

24

Key Facts

25

Money and Mileage Chart

26

www.autoeurope.com
www.autoeurope.
com
1-800-223-5555

Touring Italy By Car
Italy is a dream holiday destination and an iconic country of Europe. The boot shape of Italy dips its toe into the
Mediterranean Sea at the southern tip, has snow capped Alps at its northern end, and rolling hills, pristine
beaches and bustling cities in between. Discover the ancient ruins, fine museums, magnificent artworks and
incredible architecture around Italy, along with century old traditions, intriguing festivals and wonderful
culture. Indulge in the fantastic cuisine in Italy in beautiful locations. With so much to see and do, a self drive
holiday is the perfect way to see as much of Italy as you wish at your own pace.
Italy has an excellent road and highway network that will allow you to enjoy all the famous sites, and give you
the freedom to uncover some undiscovered treasures as well. This guide is aimed at the traveler that enjoys the
independence and comfort of their own vehicle. We have included information you’ll need for a self drive holiday in Italy, from renting a car, rules of the road to some great ideas for touring the different regions of this
unique and wonderfully varied country.

Tips in Driving In Italy
Driving in Italy can be a wonderful experience, and in
some cases it’s a pure necessity. Here are a few tips to
help you acclimatize to driving in Italy, and help make
your self-drive holiday the best that it can be.

Important Italian Road
Signs

Familiarize yourself with the road signs and parking
rules.
Drive on the right hand side of the road. The driver sits
on the left hand side of the car.
Italian drivers are competent and fast. Do not be daunted by aggressive driving, instead be confident and you’ll
fit right in.

Stop

One Way

When you collect your car rental, familiarize yourself
with the car’s controls.
Types of roads in Italy:
Autostrada: Motorways and freeways
Major Roads: Dual carriageways and highways
with more than one lane in each direction and generally fast moving
Minor Roads: Narrow, winding roads with one lane
in each direction and slower moving traffic
White Roads: Narrow, dirt or white gravel roads
through the countryside. Known locally as ‘Strade
Bianche’.

No Motor Vehicles

Parking

No Passing

The center lane of a three lane highway is for passing or
overtaking. Slower traffic drives on the right lane.
Be cautious on narrow winding roads on routes such as
Cinque Terre and the Amalfi Coast. Most of the small
towns on these routes have little or no parking, some do
not permit cars at all so park your car outside of the
towns and see the sites on foot.

www.autoeurope. com

No Parking

Do Not Enter

1-800-223-5555

3

Driving Laws in Italy
Drivers must carry proof of insurance and domestic drivers license and registration
papers at all times. An International Drivers License (IDL) is mandatory and functions as a
translation of your US drivers license and may be obtained at American Automobile Club or the
National Auto Club
Speed limits:
130km/hr (80miles/hr) on highways (autostrada), 110km/hr (68miles/hr) on highways when wet.
110 km/hr (68miles/hr) on dual carriageways, 90km/hr (56miles/hr) when wet.
90km/hr (56miles/hr) on open roads, 80km/hr (50miles/hr) when wet.
50 km/hr (31miles/hr) inside cities regardless of weather conditions.
Hefty fines can be issued for speeding offenses, and police have the authority to collect fines on
the spot. Speed cameras are set up in many places, so if you’re caught speeding the fine will be
posted to the car rental company, who will then pay the fine with your credit card used at the
time of
collection.
Child Safety: Children under the age of four must be seated in an approved safety child seat restraint, and children aged 4 to 12 must be secured in a suitable child restraint while seated in the
front seat.
When driving on the autostrada, freeways or highways, you must drive with your headlights on.
It is illegal to talk on a mobile phone while driving in Italy.
Drunk driving is illegal. The maximum blood alcohol level is 0.05, and DUI drivers can face hefty
fines or imprisonment so be smart, do not drink and drive.
An emergency triangle must be carried in the vehicle at all times.

Insurance
Car Rental companies in Italy will normally include:
Third Party insurance: compulsory insurance and will be included in your car rental rate. This
covers you for other people’s injury and damage to their vehicle.
Collision Damage Waiver (CDW): this limits your financial liability for damage to the rented
vehicle, and is normally included in prepaid car rental rates. Rentals are normally subject to
liability excess, which can be reduced at the time you collect your rental car.
Theft: this limits your financial liability for the loss or theft of the rented vehicle and is generally
included in prepaid car rental rates.
Fire and Liability: this limits your financial liability for bodily injury or death, and is normally included in prepaid car rental rates.
Personal Accident Insurance: this covers the driver for personal injuries and is generally not included in your car rental rates. It is considered an optional extra that you can take upon collection
of the car.

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

4

License
Requirements
An International Driving license is recommended
for American drivers license holders. An International Drivers License (IDL) functions as a translation of your US drivers license in ten different languages and may be obtained at American Automobile Club or the National Auto Club International.
Make sure that you take your American license with
you as well. Car rental companies will require that
drivers have held a full license for at least one year.

Min & Max Age
Requirements
Min Driving Age: 21 – some suppliers allow drivers
from 18 years but apply a young driver’s fee.
Young Driver’s Surcharge: Drivers aged 18 years
may be charged from €22 per day, drivers 19-24
years may be charged from €15 per day.
Max Driving Age: There is no maximum driving age
in Italy with most car rental suppliers; however the
max driving age for some car rental companies is 75
years. In these cases, aged drivers may be required
to hold a letter from their physician stating they are
healthy and fit to drive. Check with Auto Europe for
further details.

Road tolls & e-tags
The Autostrada system is privately owned, and drivers
pay a toll to use it. You collect a ticket when you enter
the Autostrada, and pay the toll once you exit. When
you
arrive at an entrance of the Autostrada, head to the
gate marked Bigletto’ (ticket), rather than the Telepass
or Viacard gate. When you exit you can pay the toll at
the Bigletto cards with either cash or credit card.

Parking in Italy
Although parking may be hard to find in larger cities,
everywhere else in Italy parking is relatively easy to find.
In larger tourist areas there are numerous pay parking
lots outside of the historic areas. Street parking is designated with signs, and coloured lines denote whether it’s
paid or free parking. Blue lines indicate pay parking,
where a ticket machine will be close by to purchase a
parking ticket to
display on the car dashboard.
White lines or no lines indicate free parking. If the parking sign indicates that the parking time is limited you’ll
need to display a parking disc on the cars windshield,
which shows the time you parked. Parking discs are
sometimes included in your car rental; if not they can be
purchased from tobacconists. Ask for a disco orario.
Leaning Tower of Pisa

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

5

Italy Car Rental FAQ’s
What kind of car should I rent for my holiday in Italy?
This depends on where you’re traveling, how many people are traveling and the style of driving you intend to
do. Cars range from small (economy, compact) to larger size cars (intermediate, full size), to convertibles and
luxury vehicles. For short trips with fewer passengers opt for the smaller cars; for longer trips with the family
then a larger car , van or SUV would suit. There are plenty of car rental options to choose from; it all depends on
your personal needs.
How do I figure what car is right for me?
You can use the ACRISS system to show you which car will suit your needs.
Class

Fuel Capacity

Type

Transmission

Fuel/Air Cond.

M = Mini
E = Economy
C = Compact

0.8 - 1.0
1.0 - 1.4
1.2 - 1.6

B = 2 Door
D = 4 Door
C = 2/4 door

M = Manual
A = Automatic
N = Manual 4WD

R = Yes
N = No
D = Diesel Air

F = Full size

2.0 - 3.2

L = Limousine

C = Manual AWD

Q = Diesel No Air

P = Premium

2.0 - 4.2

S = Sports Car

B = Auto 4WD

H = Hybrid Air

L = Luxury

2.0 - 4.2

T = Convertible

D = Auto AWD

I = Hybrid No Air

X = Special

1.2 - 3.0

J = All Terrain

E = Electric Air

R= Recreational

C = Electric No Air

F = 4 Wheel Drive
X = Special
K = Commercial
Van/Truck
P = Ute
X = Special
Can I rent an automatic car in Italy?
Yes, automatic cars are available in Italy, however they will be more
expensive than manual cars and not as readily available as manuals.
Will I be able to collect my rental car direct from the airport once I arrive, or will I have to take a shuttle bus to
the depot?
In most cases, car rental desks and depots are located at domestic and international airports, or located just
outside the terminal grounds with shuttle services available. You should be informed when you make your car
rental booking exactly where your car rental depot will be located.
Are there additional fees to collect my rental car from Italian airports?
Auto Europe’s car rental rates usually include the airport or ‘premium location’ fees for car rental collections in
Italy. Check your prepaid voucher to make sure that this included.
What about collecting my rental car from downtown Italy?
Premium location fees will include airport, downtown and railway depots, and should be included with inclusive
prepaid car rental. Check with Auto Europe to ensure this is included.
Do I need a credit card to collect my car rental?
Yes. Car rental suppliers will usually freeze the excess of the vehicle (from €200) which will be refunded when
the rental car is returned at the end of the rental. This amount may be refunded via a check which is sent to the
renter’s residential address.
Can I collect my rental car in one Italian city and drop it off in another Italian city?
Yes, this is certainly possible, however in most cases there will be a one-way fee payable when you collect your
rental. Check with Auto Europe before you travel to find out any additional costs.

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

6

Italy Car Rental FAQ’s
Can I visit another country outside of Italy and then return the car to Italy?
In most cases, travel to other countries is permitted but this depends on the vehicle you’re driving and the
country that you’re be visiting. Generally, luxury and high end cars are not permitted into some Eastern Europe
countries. Check with Auto Europe for further details.
Can I collect my rental car in Italy and drop it off in another European country?
Yes you can, but be aware that an international one way fee will be charged upon collection. This is dependant on the country and the distance that country is from the collection point. Auto Europe will advise you at
the time of booking of any international one way fees.
Since cars cannot be taken into Venice, where is the best place to pick up, drop off or park my rental car
when I visit Venice?
Auto Europe has car rental depots in Venice downtown, Piazzale Roma, which is right opposite the ferry terminal that will take you across into Venice. Piazza Roma has a city owned parking station where you can
safely leave your car.
Can I drive my rental vehicle on Cinque Terre?
Yes. There are some sections of the Cinque Terre where cars are not permitted, however when you do travel
to Cinque Terre, park your car outside the towns and explore these places on foot. Drive with caution and
confidence on this route, as the roads are winding and narrow, however with confidence and common
sense this will be a brilliant experience.
What do I do if I want to extend my car rental while I’m in Italy?
Once the car rental has commenced you can call Auto Europe toll free at 00-800-223-5555-5, and if the car is
available to be extended, you will be offered additional days at the Auto Europe rate.
Should I take out additional insurance on my car rental?
Rental rates will include basic insurance: Collision Damage Waiver (CDW), Third Party Liability and Theft
Protection. In the event that your rental vehicle is accidentally damaged, regardless of who is at fault, or
stolen, the Insurance excess is the maximum amount you are liable for. In Italy, the base amount of excess
begins at €600.
Should I rent a GPS for driving in Italy?
Definitely! You can rent a GPS from Auto Europe for as low as $8 per day plus shipping and includes a
portable Garmin Nuvi complete with country mapping. We have the unit delivered to your home before
you go.

Italy’s Regions
NORTHWEST ITALY: Piedmont, Liguria, Lombardy and Valle d’Aosta.
NORTHEAST ITALY: Emilia-Romania, Friuli-Venezia Giulia,
Trentino-Alto Adige and Veneto.
CENTRAL ITALY: Lazio, Abruzzo, Marche, Tuscany and Umbria.
SOUTHERN ITALY: Apulia, Basilicata, Campania and Molise.
SICILY & SARDINIA
MAJOR CITIES: Rome, Florence, Milan, Venice, Cinque Terre, Turin,
Genoa, Siena, Pisa, Lucca, Naples, Pompeii, Amalfi Coast, Calabria
and Palermo.

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

7

Rome
Rome is the capital city of Italy, situated on the river Tibur between the Apennines and the Tyrrhenian Sea. The
Eternal City of Rome was originally founded as a village in the 8th century BC, and over the last two and a half
thousand years, with the might of the ancient Roman Empire, earned the esteemed title of the Capitol of the
World. Although today it’s no longer caput mundi, it is a living masterpiece, rich in architectural and cultural
beauty with a unique love of life and appreciation of art and history. Rome is a bustling, thriving, chaotic city,
where the modern day life blends in with ancient buildings and magnificent dolce vita – the sweet life.

What’s On…

Best Things to See & Do

Visit The Vatican – home to the Pope and the Roman Catholic Church. See St Peter’s Basilica, the Sistine Chapel, St
Epiphany Fair in Piazza Navona – A fair of toys,
Peter’s Square and the Vatican City Gardens. View the brilsweets and other presents around the Bernini
liant work of Michelangelo, Raphael and Botticelli on the
fountain.
chapel ceilings and frescoed panels.
April:
Rome’s Good Friday Procession – a torchlit proces- The Colosseum - See where gladiators fought in mortal
sion moving from the Colosseum re-enacting the 14 combat in Ancient Rome in the epitome of Roman
Stations of the Cross.
architecture that was built in AD72.
May:
May Day Musical – Rome celebrates spring’s arrival The Roman Forum - Visit what was once the religious,
commercial and political center of Ancient Rome.
with fantastic music festival.
June:
The Pantheon – This is one of Rome’s best preserved
Estate Romana Festival - Running from late June to ancient monuments, built as a temple in 27BC, and is a
September this festival offers music, film theater
brilliant example of Ancient Roman architectural ingenuiand children’s fun.
ty.
July:
Trevi Fountain – toss a coin into Rome’s largest and most
Donna Sotto le Stelle – Roman high fashion parad- famous fountain to ensure that you return to Rome.
ed on the Spanish Steps in the Piazza di Spagna.
Escape the city’s buzz and head to Tivoli: Villa d’Este – enAugust:
15th – Feast of the Assumption: the streets of Rome joy a stroll through the landscaped gardens and mossy
come alive with the Gran Ballo di Ferragosto, with fountains in this famous Italian-styled garden.
dancing in the town squares.
Experience magnificent food – try some local made gelato,
September – October:
pasta and pizza, and sip delicious coffee at an outdoor
Roma Europa Festival – Modern art, theater, music café.
and dance including Italian and European artists.
Rome Jazz Festival – music festival dedicated to
jazz that’s been running since 1876.
Celebration of St Francis – Rome celebrates its
patron saint, St Francis, on this feast day.
International Film Festival – a celebration of the
Italian Film Industry.
January:

The Colosseum, Rome

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

8

Self Drive Tours around Rome
Rome to Tivoli
The drive from Rome to Tivoli is a relatively short
drive, and well worth the effort. Head east from Rome
toward La Rustica, and follow the Strada del Parchi until you reach Colle Merulino. Turn north onto the SP51
to Pontelucano, then east along the SS5 to Tivoli in
the region of Lazio.
Tivoli is home to the Villa d’Este in the Piazza Trento.
This is one of Italy’s finest palaces, however one of the
main reasons people come here is for the gardens.
Ville d’Este is constructed with hundreds of water
fountains and water features. While in Tivoli, make
some time to see the Hadrian’s Villa, a magnificent
complex incorporating lakes, fountains, baths, temples and gardens. If you get the chance see the other
ancient monuments of the Temple of Tiburtine Sibyl
and the Temple of Hercules.

Villa d’Este, Tivoli

Rome to Montepulciano, Tuscany
One of the nicest areas outside of Rome is Tuscany, and the ancient city of
Montepulciano is located right in its heart. You can drive there in little over two
hours if you take the autostrada, but if you’d like to see the magnificent countryside of the Tuscan regions, head north from Rome via the SS2. This will take you on
a beautiful drive through La Storta, Le Rughe, Sette Vene, Monterosi and
Ronciglione, which is in the Cimini Mountains and close to Punta del Lago. Head
further north, stopping along the way at Viterbo whose historic center is surrounded by medieval walls and is home to the Viterbo University and fantastic ancient
architecture.
Further along the SS2 you’ll come across the beautiful town of Montefiascone on
the banks of Lake Bolsena, where you’ll be met by the incredible Saint Margherrita’s Cathedral. Head north around the lake to Bolsena, then on through San Lorenz Nuovo and Acquapendente, which is home to the Cathedral of San Sepolcro
and some of Tuscany’s best historic buildings. Enjoy the picturesque countryside
and medieval villages along the way to Montepulciano. This beautiful town is set
amongst vineyards and beautiful scenery, and is renowned for its art, architecture
and exquisite lifestyle.

Civita di Bagnoregio, Viterbo

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

9

Northwest Italy
Northwest Italy is a unique and spectacular region of Italy, offering all the best for a wonderful holiday. Relax on
the Italian Riviera, bask in the sun in crystal clear waters, wind through medieval towns with narrow cobble
stoned streets, shop in the fashion capital of Italy, explore incredible historical sites, drive through vineyards
over rolling hills, and ski, hike or bike over magnificent mountains.
Regions: Piedmont, Liguria, Lombardy and Valle d’Aosta
Cities: Aosta, Bergamo, Brescia, Genoa, La Spezia, Milan, San Remo and Turin.
Other: Cinque Terre and Lake Como.

Best Things to See & Do

What’s On…

Lombardy:

January:

Explore the capital, Milan – see the financial and economic
powerhouse city of Italy.
Visit Como – see the lake where the rich and famous holiday,
enjoy all the water sports and leisure of this beautiful region.
Explore Bergamo – this is one of the most picturesque cities in
Italy, where modern and historic architecture stand side by side.
Liguria:

Drive along La Riveria di Ponente – follow the road along the
Ligurian coast from Genoa to the border with France to Nice.
Visit Portofino – stay in one of Italy’s most exclusive seaside
resorts.
Cinque Terre – visit the World Heritage Listed Site and now national park, and see small coastal villages clutching the terraced
cliffs with unparalleled views of the Mediterranean.
Explore the hilly, winding streets of Genoa – explore the caruggi
in the old part of Genoa and get a taste of true Italian history.
Piedmont:

See the Museo Egizio, Turin – one of the world’s largest Egyptian
museums.

Visit the Mole Antonelliana, Turin – this houses Italy’s National
Cinema Museum that was originally built as a synagogue.
Relax in Turin – stroll through the many elegant squares, gardens, parks and café’s in this beautiful city.
Ski the Italian Alps – The Milky Way is one of the world’s most
well renown ski fields and home to the 2006 Winter Olympics.
Forage for truffles – Visit the forests near Asti for exquisite truffles.
Valle d’Aosta:

Sightsee in one of Italy’s wealthiest regions – visit the Aosta
Cathedral, the Arch of Augustus and La Maison de la Fontina.
Take a cable car ride – glide over the Alps from Aosta to Chamonix for the best view of the region.
Go hiking – follow one of the hiking trails across some of Europe’s most spectacular mountains, Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa and
the Matterhorn.

San Remo Flower Festival, San Remo,
Liguria.
Fair of Saint Orso, Aosta, this 1,000 year old
event attracts artisans, musical
entertainment, food and wine.
February:
Fair of San Faustino & Giovita, Brescia,
Lombardy – the cities largest fair, with
Italian and European vendors
March:
Feast Day of St Joseph, La Spezia, Liguria –
massive festival, with markets, music and
local foods.
Chocolate Fair, Turin, Piedmont – market
fair of local and Italian chocolates
April:
St George Bonfire, Portofino, Liguria
May:
Zegna Regatta, Portofino, Liguria – watch
the sailing regatta along the spectacular
coast.
Second Sunday in May, Sagra del Pesce (fish
festival), Camogli, Liguria – visitors flock to
witness the locals pay homage to the patron
saint of fisherman, St Fortunato.
Alba International Music Festival, Alba,
Piedmont – musical festival held over May,
June and July.
September:
Aplio de Asti, Asti, Peidmont – famous bare
back horse race.
December:
Christmas markets, Borga Dora, Turin – best
festive markets in Italy.

Cinque Terre, Liguria

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

10

Self Drive Tours in Northwest Italy
Tour the Alpine Valleys

Italian Alps, Piedmont

Begin this tour in Ivrea just north of Turin and head toward the famous Carema vineyards. Drive further north
to Point St Martin, where you’ll be able to see an ancient
Roman bridge. From here, travel east to Gaby and see
the Neil Falls and further on to Gressoney la Trinite at
the foot of Mount Rosa. Here you can take in great skiing
or snowboarding in winter and fantastic hiking or watersports in the summer.
If you head west from Point St Martin, you’ll come across
Bard, etched into a deep narrow gorge at the head of the Aosta Valley.
There’s a magnificent fort and lovely cobbled streets to explore. Further
along, you’ll get to Verres, home to the Verres Castle that was built in the
fourteenth century. Drive through Emarese and Brusson and you’ll arrive
at the ski resort of Champuloc, which is a quiet and pristine ski resort town
on Mount Rosa.

Tour Lake Como
This route follows just one section of Lake Como, and needs to be handled with care, since the roads at times can be narrow and somewhat
windy. But do not be daunted, it’s well worth the effort. Begin this tour
at Lecco and follow the SS583 through Moregge, Onno and Limonta to
the town of Bellagio which is located at the tip of the peninsula that
juts into Lake Como. This pretty town is one of the main tourist centers
on the lake and the main center for the lakes’ boat services. Follow the
SS583 back down the west coast of the peninsular through Lezzenzo,
Careno and Blevio to the town of Como.
From Como, drive north again on the SS340 through Cernobbio, Ossuccio and Tremezzo to Mennagio. Mennagio is a little quieter than other
towns along the lake, but has great restaurants, café’s and gelatarias.

Lake Como, Lombardy

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

11

Northeast Italy
The northeast region of Italy is, quite simply, spectacular. The beauty and majesty of the rugged snow-capped
mountains, exceptional art, ancient frescoes and historic architecture. Unique cities such as Venice and Padova,
true romantic cities like Verona, magnificent scenery and friendly locals make this a special holiday destination.
Regions: Emilia-Romania, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino-Alto Adige and Veneto.
Cities: Bologna, Ravenna, Padova, Rimini, Trento, Trieste, Verona, Venice and Vicenza.

Best Things to See & Do

What’s On…

The Veneto:
Venice – no trip to Italy would be complete without seeing Venice. Walk along the canals, take a gondola ride, marvel at the Basilica di San Marco and St Marks square and savour the good life.
Explore the homes of Romeo and Juliet – visit Verona and see
Casa Giulietta (Juliette’s house), see the huge amphitheater that’s
Arena, and the Giardino do Palazzo Giusti, one of the finest
gardens in Italy.

January:

Trentino-Alto Adige:
Ski in the Dolomites – enjoy over 350 miles of ski runs and hundreds of cross country tracks.
Explore the lakes region – visit the beautiful Lake Garda and Lake
of Carezza.
Visit Bolzano – the capital of Alto Adige and influenced by German culture due to its close proximity to the German border.
Wine tasting – drive to Meran, surrounded by high mountains
and is one of the best red wine producing areas of Italy.
Friuli-Venezia Giulia:
See the Gian Grotto near Triest.

Visit the Miramare Castle, Trieste – built in the 18th century and is
positioned above the Adriatic Sea.
Emilia-Romania:

Indulge your gastronomic senses in Parma – home to Parma ham
and the original parmigiano reggiano (parmesan cheese)
Visit Europe’s oldest university – Bologna is home to Italy, and
Europe’s oldest uni, and also hosts a fantastic medieval center.
Enjoy ancient artworks – drive to Ferrara and Ravenna so see
magnificent Byzantine mosaics and a wonderful Renaissance
center.

www.autoeurope. com

Vintage Car Race, Dolomites – Racing over
500km of icy roads, the Winter Marathon
drives to & from the Madonna do
Campiglio resort, and features historical
cars built before 1968.
February:
Carnevarle, Venice – annual Mardi Gras
festival with ornate masks, exquisite fancy dress balls and festivals.
Verona in Love, Verona – five day festival
over Valentines Day, inspired by the story
of Romeo and Juliette.
Carnevale di Cento, Cento – one of the
major festivals in Italy.
April:
Vinitaly - The Wine Festival, Verona – one
of the largest wine exhibitions in the
world.
June:
San Daniele Ham Festival, Dan Daniele,
Friuli – four day festival dedicated to food,
particularly prosciutto.
December:
Christmas Fairs across Northeast Italy –
fantastic festive market stalls held across
the month of December in almost all
regions, offering traditional crafts and
food plus classic Christmas concerts and
exhibitions.

1-800-223-5555

12

Self Drive Tours in Northeast Italy
Dolomites, Trentino-Alto Adige

Explore the Dolomites
Travel from Venice to Belluno to see the best of the
Dolomites. Use Belluno as your base to explore the
spectacular Dolomite mountains, skiing, snowboarding, hiking or mountain biking. There’s something
for everyone in this great region. You can travel the
fast way across the A27 that leads direct to Belluno,
which should take just over an hour on the Autostrada. The alternative will take you a little over two
hours without stops, but this is definitely not a drive
to be rushed.
From Venice take the A27 to Casier and head west on
the SR53 to Treviso, where there are plenty of ancient ruins and gardens to explore. Head onto the
SR48 head northeast through Montebelluna and Pederobba, and onto the
SB1 through Vas, Capen and the beautiful town of Lentiai. Enjoy the winding roads, charming villages and magnificent mountain vistas along the
way through Mei, Trishiana, Viscome and onto Belluno.

Venice to Lake Garda
Head west from the city of Verona on the
E70 towards Padua, which is reputed to be
the oldest city in northern Italy. See the
Scrovegni Chapel, the Palazzo della
Ragione and the Basilica do Sant’Antonio.
Further west, you’ll come into Vicenza which has been listed as a World Heritage Site. In Vicenza you’ll be able to
see the Basilica Palladiana, the Teatro Olimpico and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto.
Drive west through the town of San Boniface to the beautiful city of Verona. Here you can visit the Arena, the
Roman amphitheater, the Castelvecchio, and see what inspired Shakespeare to write Romeo and Juliet. Outside of Verona you can explore the magnificent wine districts of Valpolicella and Soave. Back onto the A4,
drive another half hour to the unrivalled Lake Garda, one of the most beautiful lakes in all of Europe.
This beautiful region offers splendid natural scenery and is a playground for people of all ages. Visit the
village of Sirmione with historical buildings and castle, see the beautiful Gardone Riviera, go hiking or
climbing at Monte Baldo and Riva del Garda.

Lake Garda, Trentino-Alto Adige

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

13

Central Italy
Central Italy is home to some of the most iconic sites in Italy: the Leaning Tower of Pisa, Michelangelo’s David,
the Tuscan countryside, the Colosseum and the Vatican City, and then some! The regions of central Italy also
offers magnificent mountains, rolling fields, beachside resorts, world famous wines and wonderful food, exceptional arts, architecture and culture. You’ll never be short of something fun to do or something beautiful to
see in central Italy.
Regions: Lazio, Abruzzo, Marche, Tuscany and Umbria

Best Things to See & Do
Lazio

Rome – visit the Colosseum, the Pantheon, the Vatican, including the Sistine Chapel and the Vatican Museums.
Rome - When in Rome, do as the Romans do…enjoy coffee in an outdoor café, dine on pizza and pasta, and toss
a coin in the Trevi Fountain for good luck.
Visit the market place – go to Campo de Fliori, Rome, a beautiful rectangular market place with fresh produce.
Drive out to Lake Albano - visit this beautiful region, see some of the historic towns and grand villas and see
the summer home of the Pope in Castel Galdolfo.
Tuscany

Florence – see some of the world’s best and most famous artworks, including Botticelli, Raphael, Michelangelo,
and Titian at the Uffizi gallery; visit the Boboli Gardens, and the Ponte Vecchio that crosses the Arno River.
Pisa – see one of the true icons of Italy, the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
Visit Siena – explore the Gothic architecture and incredible art in this World Heritage listed site.
Learn to cook – take in a cooking class and learn how to create authentic Italian (and Tuscan) dishes.
Visit Lucca – a beautiful old city that’s home to great restaurants, lovely churches and a rich history and is
hidden behind monumental renaissance walls.

Live likea king in Il Chianti – drive through rolling hills, vineyards and farmhouses and sample the world famous food & wine.
Umbria

Perugia – Explore the cobbled streets, stroll along a Roman aqueduct, walk under the Etruscan arch, visit the
Duomo (cathedral).
Explore Assisi – see this magnificent hill town that was home to St Francis.
Orvietto – see the gorgeous cathedral in the city that’s built precariously on the edge of a cliff.
Explore the countryside – stop in some beautiful, ancient towns and villages, such as Gubbio, Spoletto and
Spello.
Abruzzo
This beautiful region of Italy lays less than 50 miles to the east of Rome.
Visit the beautiful National Parks – mountain climbing, hiking and sightseeing in Nazionale del Gran Sasso e
Monti della Laga.
Hit the slopes – ski or snowboard any one of Abruzzo’s 15 ski resorts in the Apennines.
Enjoy Italy’s sandy coastline– Fossacesia, and Marinscuro are popular beaches with great seaside resorts.
Le Marche

Visit Urbino – this university town is full of Renaissance art, history and steep, steep streets.
Explore the ancient villages of Macerata and Ascoli Piceno – full of culture, art and rich in history, these towns
dot the landscape of Le Marche.
Soak up the sun – visit the beachside resorts along the east coast near Monte Conero and Pesaro.

Trevi Fountain, Rome

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

14

What’s On in Central Italy…
January:

Carnivale, Foiano della Chiana, Arezzo – one of the oldest Carnivale celebrations in Italy, with masked balls, costumes and parades.
February:
Spello, Perugia, Umbria – Olive and bruschetta festivals celebrating the olive harvest.
March:
La Festa degli Statuti, Fossato de Vico, Perugia, Umbria – festival
re-enacting the signing of the towns constitution, medieval
costumes and plenty of food and music.
May:
Corsa dei Ceri, Gubbio, Perugia, Umbria – authentic and unique
medieval festival.
Iris Garden of Florence Opening, Florence – for 19 days only in
May, these magnificent gardens are open to the public.
June:
Festival of the Two Worlds, Spoletto, Umbria – music, dance and
cultural festival.
Giostra Della Quintana, Foligno, Umbria – historic parade and
Renaissance jousting, run from June to September.
International Opera Festival, June – August, Arena di Verona
July:
Malborghetto Festival, Rome – festival featuring theatrical
performances in the Malborghetto Archaeological Park.
Mercantia Festival, Certaldo Alto, Florence – international
gathering of street performers and artist set in the beautiful
medieval town.
Umbria Jazz Festival, Pergia and Cortona, Umbria – weeklong music festival.
August:
The Baroque Festival, Viterbo – from August to October the
Baroque Festival focuses on classical music, both Italian and
International.
September:
La Macchina de Santa Rosa, Viterbo – Celebration of the city’s
patron saint, St Rosa.
Sagrantino Wine Festival, Montefacto, Tuscany – festival devoted
to celebrate the local regions wines.
Umbra Music Festival, Perugia, Umbria – Historic music festival.
Pane Nostrum, Sendigallia, Marche – the City of the White Art
hosts a three day festival dedicated to bread.
October:
Feast Day for St Francesco – nationwide celebrations in honour of
Italy’s patron saint.
EuroChocolate Festival, Perugia, Umbria – 9 day festival of indulgence and decadence, in honour of this ancient Etruscan towns
most famous export.

www.autoeurope. com

Carnivela, Arez-

Gubbio Festival, Umbria

Umbria Jazz Festival, Pergia

1-800-223-5555

15

Self Drive Tours in Central Italy
Florence to Siena via
the Chianti Valley
Take on the beautiful Tuscan countryside
on this lovely drive that would take just
under two hours without stopping, but
the sites along this route are definitely
worth it. Follow the SS222 south from
Florence and enjoy the scenery through
Strada in Chianti, Greti and Greve in ChiUmbria
anti. Once you get to the town of Castlina
in Chinati, head west to Radda in Chianti and then south through Lecchi, San Sano and
Monti. The small village of San Giovanni is a pretty rest stop, then on through Boglione
to Siena. Spend an hour, a day or even base your holiday in this beautiful region; there
are so many vineyards, restaurants and friendly villages for you to visit and explore.

The Best of Umbria
Begin this circle tour from Perugia, Umbria. Take the SS75 southeast through Bastia Umbra and Spello to
the town Foligno. Here you can enjoy the Renaissance architecture when you stroll around the town,
which is surrounded by olive groves and vineyards. Take the SS3 through Trevi and onto Spoleto, where
you can visit the Duomo, see ancient relics in the Museo Archeologico
or walk across the 14th century viaduct, Ponte delle Torri.
From Spoletto, drive west through Acquasparta and onto Todi which is
home to great architecture, fine regional foods and a laid back pace.
Further west on the SS448 you’ll come across Orvieto, the city built on
the edge of a craggy clifftop. From Orvieto, follow the SR71 via Piegaro,
enjoying the Umbrian scenery along the way, to complete your circle
back to Perugia.

Vineyard in Um-

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

16

Southern Italy
Regions: Puglia, Basilicata, Campania, Calabria and Molise.
Cities: Bari, Brindisi, Catanzaro, Foggia, Naples, Potenza, Salerno, Taranto and Reggio
Experience the ‘real Italy’ in the heel and toe of the Italian boot. This region is home to wonderful national parks,
spectacular coastline and beaches, incredible historic sites, and friendly locals. Its close ties to agriculture generate some of Europe’s most famed food and wines, with year-round festivals commemorating great produce. You
will also enjoy the warmth, hospitality and culture of the people of Southern Italy.

What’s On…

Best Things to See & Do

February:

Puglia
Bari – Bari is the capital of Puglia. See the Suabian castle and the
Basilica of San Nicola, visit the old town (Bari Vecchia) or just soak
up the chic atmosphere in its restaurants and cafes.
Bask in the magnificent coastline – this coast consists of white
sand beaches, dramatic white limestone cliffs and grottos and
sparkling blue and emerald waters.
Lecce – explore the rich Baroque architectural monuments and the
Church of the Holy Cross.

Sant’Agata in Catania, Catania – follow this
500 year old celebration of the cities patron
saint.
Carnivale – all across southern Italy, costumed parades, masks and street parties
dominate February with a fabulous party
mood.
May:
I Tri de Cruci, Tropea – this annual folk festival celebrates with fireworks and street
performances.
Infiorata, Noto – see amazing floral displays
that line the streets of this Baroque town.
Three Gulfs Cup, Bay of Naples – see beautiful boats race from Naples to Capri.
June:
Marriage of the Trees, Accettura – witness
the ancient ritual of fertility with reenactment the marriage of the king and
queen of the
forest.
St Andrews Celebration, Amalfi – this is the
most spectacular celebration for St Andrew,
with food, particularly fish, and song.
August

Byzantine New Year, Amalfi – Costume parades and medieval tournaments commemorate this annual party.
September:
Feast of San Gennaro, Naples – residents
celebrate St Gennaro as their patron saint’s
statue is paraded through town.
Pizza Festival, Naples – the best chance to
taste the genuine Pizza Napolitana over 11
days of celebrations.

Basilicata
Metera – see the stone Sassi (houses) that have been dug into the
cliff face.
Holiday with the rich and famous – visit the seaside resort of Maratea.
Explore the forests and peaks – explore the Parco Nazionale del
Pollino, and the soaring peaks of the Lucanian Apennines.
Campania
Naples – See the Angioino Castle, the Napoli cathedral, the Royal
Palace and the Catacombs of San Gennaro.
Go back in time in Pompeii and Herculaneum– take a look at the
ancient Roman cities that were covered by volcanic ash over 2,000
years ago and frozen in time.
Take a tour to Capri – see one of the best natural beauties in all of
Italy, with vineyards, olive groves, fantastic beaches and
magnificent resorts.
Drive the Amalfi Coast – this is one of Italy’s most famous roads on
part of Italy’s most spectacular coastline.
Visit Mt Vesuvius and the craters of the Campi Flegrei.
See Salerno – the second largest city in the Campania region, and
home to the Monastery of St Benedetto and the Castle of Salerno.
Calabria

Get close to nature – visit any one of Calabria’s three national
parks: Pollino, Sila and the Aspromonte. Explore the 800km of
spectacular coastline, with incredible cliffs and unspoilt beaches.
Explore the cities – see Reggio Calabria, Cosenza and Crotone.
Molise

Go skiing or hiking – head to the Monte del Matese for brilliant
snow sports in winter and climbing in warmer months.
See historic sites – visit Sepino, and the town of
Pietrabbondante that dates back to 1,000BC.
Soak up the sun – visit the resort town of
Termoli for a great beach break.

Cetara, Amalfi Coast

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

17

Self Drive Tours in Southern Italy
The Amalfi Coast
The Amalfi Coast stretches from Vietri sul Mare to Positano along the southern side of the Sorrentine Peninsula
in the Campania region of Italy. This is one of the most famous drives in Europe, particularly for its scenic beauty,
the beautiful towns that dot the coast and its rugged terrain. The Amalfi Coast is also listed as a World Heritage
Site. The road is winding and narrow, so be confident and take your time around the bends. In most cases, once
you arrive at a town it’s a good idea to park your car outside and
explore on foot.
To drive the entire route, begin the Amalfi Coast tour from Vietri
sul Mare and follow the SS163 west along the coast, along through
the town of Cetara, and the seaside resort of Maiori. Head inland to
Ravello where you can see Villa Cimbrone which hosts the best
views in all of Italy. On to Amalfi, where you should leave the car
and explore the small squares, buzzing Piazza’s and the Vagliendola region. Marvel at the white houses that cling precariously to the
rock faces. Back in the car, drive along to Conca, the town also built
along the cliff face, through to Praiano and onto Positano. Explore
the town, and take a boat trip out to explore Il Galli.
From Positano, drive inland through Coli di Fontanelle and Sant
Agnello and onto Sorrento. This beautiful town is perched on cliffs
that look directly over the Bay of Naples, with plenty of café’s and
restaurants, cathedrals and museums to keep you busy. Stroll
through the streets of the old town, and see where the rich and
famous spend their summer holidays.

Amalfi Coast, Campa-

Trulli, Alberobello

Bari to Brindisi
Spend time exploring Bari the Bari Vecchia. It’s beautiful medieval
quarter and the cathedral of Saint Nicolaus. Drive south on the
SS100 through Cellamare and Casamassima and onto the town of
Alberobello. Here you can see the World Heritage listed Trulli,
which are amazing buildings made from dry-walled limestone
blocks built in the 1600’s. Further along you’ll come across the
gleaming white town of Ostuni
perched on a hill in the olive
groves of the Trullo Valley. From
here, head north toward the coast
and travel south east along the
SS379, enjoying the white sandy
beaches and rugged cliffs to the
city of Brindisi.

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

18

Sicily & Sardinia
Sicily is the largest island on the Mediterranean Sea, and is the place where Italy, Africa and Greece come together. Here you will see ancient Italian and Greek ruins, amazing beach resorts, beautiful baroque architecture, magnificent cuisine, a smouldering Mt. Etna, brilliant blue coastline and buzzing cities. Sardinia is an island with unparalleled natural beauty, magnificent national parks, great beaches and crystal clear waters. Its hinterland is covered with citrus groves, and pastures of grazing cattle and sheep. The people from Sardinia have a somewhat
laidback lifestyle, the result of a wonderful mix of different cultures and heritage.

Best Things to See & Do
Sicily

Palermo – explore the hidden treasures, see the Cathedral of
Monreale with it’s magnificent mosaics and impressive structure, taste incredible fresh produce, marvel at the amazing
blend of modern, sophisticated buildings next to crumbling
architecture.

Catania – see the Greek/Roman theater, the Odeon, St Francis
of Assisi nigh the Immaculate, St Agatha’s Abbey, the Piazza
del Duomo, the Church of St Benedict, and the Ursino Castle.

Walk through the Valley of the Temples – visit Agrigento and
see the site of the village first founded by the ancient Greeks.

Take a boat to tour the islands – jump in a boat and visit the
Aolian Islands, including Lipari, Vulcano and Panerea.

Noto – visit the World Heritage listed sandstone buildings and
see the beautiful baroque architecture.

Learn ancient history in Syracuse – see where the ancient
Greeks settled.

Messina – visit the Museo Regionale with works dating back to
Byzantine and Norman ages.
Sardinia
Cagliari – visit the open air archaeological sites, museums and
churches.

Enjoy the sun and sand – kick back and soak up the sun on the
stunning beaches on the Costa Verde.

Experience the unique local cuisine – taste the difference
between Sardinian and Italian food by sampling its bread,
fresh pasta, cakes, plus delicious semi freddo ice-cream in Cagliari.

What’s On…
January:
Piana degli Albanesi, Palermo - Byzantine
Epiphany celebrations.
St Sebastian, Acireale – festival celebrating
San Sebastiano.
February:
St Agatha’ Feast Day, Catania – huge festival
including a 2 day procession and is one of the
largest religious processions in the world.
Almond Blossom Festival, Agrigento – held on
the first Sunday of the month, with procession,
dancing and international folk dancing.
Carnival Week, across Sicily and Sardinia
March:
St Joseph’s Day, across Sicily – festivals and
celebrations honouring St Joseph.
May:
Beach Festival, Mondello – beach parties held
in second week on the month.
July:
Renaissance Music Festival, Erice – international music celebration.
L’Ardoa di San Costantino, Sedilo, Sardinia –
monumental horse race held on the grounds of
the Sanctuario di San Constantino.
August:
Holy week and Ferragosta – celebrations held
all over Sicily.
Parade of the Giants, Messina – parades with
floats of the city’s mythical founders.

Explore the undersea world – dive or snorkel in the crystal
clear waters near Alghero.

Chiesa de Noto, Sicily

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

19

Self Drive Tours in Sicily & Sardinia
Eastern Tour of Sicily
Since the island of Sicily is so large and there are so many sights to
see, our driving guide will give you a glimpse of some of the best
parts of the island. Begin the tour at Messina, where you can see
the Cathedral, the Church of the Annunziata dei Catalani and the
Fontana del Nettuno. Head south toward Taormina, home to
popular beaches on the Ionian Sea, as well as an ancient Greek
theater, lively bars and great restaurants.
Drive on past the nature reserve that is the gorgeous island of Isola Bella. You’ll be able to view Mt Etna to your right as you head
south to Catania. After a stop in Catania, go through Augusta to
Siracusa, a beautiful city with ancient monuments dating back to
734BC, alongside excellent hotels and fascinating scenery. Driving on to Noto, which is famous for its fine baroque style buildings
and magnificent churches. Next stop is Modica, home to ancient
medieval buildings that cling to the edges of the steep gorge on
both sides. The last stop is at Ragusa that is built on a wide
limestone hill and is home to gorgeous Baroque architecture.

Ragusa, Sicily

Sardinia’s Stunning Coast
The entire island of Sardinia is surrounded by brilliant beaches
and crystalline waters. To see the southeast corner, drive from
Cagliari along the SP17 through Terra Mala, Geremeas and onto Solanas, then follow the road onto Villasimius. Follow the
road on through Simius, Cala Pira, Cala della Maria and onto
Monte Nai.
For the best of the cost verde, head southwest from Cagliari
through Sarroch, Pula and then up to the islands of Sant’Antioco and San Pietro. Head north to Iglesias, and follow the SS126,
enjoying the views of the coast and stopping off at some of the
best beaches on the planet.

Costa Paraiso, Sardinia

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

20

Getting into Italy
By Land
Italy is connected to mainland Europe through Austria,
France, Switzerland and Slovenia. Some mountain
passes are closed in the winter months, and sometimes
in the spring and autumn, so the best road options are
the main tunnels. The primary connections into Italy
that are open year round are:
From France: the Mont Blanc Tunnel at Chamonix,
connecting to the A5 for Turin and Milan. You can also
drive into Italy from France along the French Riviera
via the E80.
From Switzerland: the Grand St Bernard, the Gotthard
and the new Swiss Lötschberg Base tunnels.
From Austria: the Brenner Pass which connects to the
A22 to Bologna.

Mont Blanc Tunnel

Italian Airport Information
Rome: Fiumincino (FCO)
19 miles southwest of the city,
approx 30-55 minutes journey.
www.adr.it
Ph: +39 06 65951

Florence: Peretola (FLR)
7 miles northwest of the city,
approx 25 minutes journey
www.aeroporto.firenze.it
Ph: +39 055 3061 300

Rome: Ciampino (CIA)
7.5 miles from the city,
approx 30-40 minutes journey.
www.adr.it
Ph: +39 06 65951

Venice: Marco Polo Airport
13 miles north of the city,
approx 50 minutes journey
www.veniceairport.it
Ph: +39 041 260 9260

Milan: Malpensa (MXP)
27 miles northwest of the city,
approx 30 minutes journey.
www.sea-aeroportimilano.it
Ph: +39 02 7486 7702

Pisa: Galileo Galilei (PSA)
1 mile north of they city center,
approx 10 minutes journey
www.pisa-airport.com
Ph: +39 050 849 300

Milan: Linate (LIN)
8 miles southeast of the city,
approx 30 minutes journey.
www.sea-aeroportimilano.it
Ph: +39 02 7485 2952

By Sea
Main Ports:
Ancona:
www.autoritaportuale.ancona.it
Brindisi: www.porto.br.it
Naples: www.porto.napoli.it
Venice: www.port.venice.it
Naples Port, Campania

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

21

Accommodation Ideas
Motorhomes:
All the convenience of accommodation and transport in one!
Rent a fully equipped motorhome from Auto Europe. Call us
for up to date models and rates.

Hotels:
There are literally thousands of hotels and pensions in Italy, so
you’ll have plenty of options to choose from. Hotels are
charged according to class, season, availability and locality,
and are generally rated from 1 to 5 stars. For a full list of all Italian hotels and pensions, see the full list published by the Italian State Tourist Board.

Bed & Breakfasts:
Be welcomed by families that open their homes to guests, and
who will be more than happy to impart their knowledge of the
local areas and customs. The rooms are normally slightly smaller than guest houses or hotels, but this could be one of the
cheapest and friendliest ways to tour Italy.

Villas:
Live like a king (or queen!). Enjoy the laidback lifestyle and live
true Italian ways

Farmhouses (Agriturismo):
Experience rural Italian life and a slow paced holiday, stay in a
room in a farmhouse in the countryside and enjoy the scenery,
meet the local people and sample the regional food. This is
becoming an increasingly popular option for holidays longer
that 7 days, since you can really get to know the ‘true’ Italy.
And this is often a cheaper option than staying in city hotels.

Camping & Caravanning:
There are over 1,700 official campsites in Italy, and many of the
larger campsites provide tents or caravans to rent.

Youth & Backpacker Hostels:
The Italian Youth Hostels Association runs over 100 youth hostels over Italy. In the summer months it’s a good idea to book a
couple of weeks in advance to avoid disappointment.

Alpine Huts:
Perfect for mountain hikers, walkers can stop in for refreshments, meals and an overnight stay, usually with an alpine
farmer. Simple dwellings that are generally only open July to
September.

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

22

Climate & Weather
The north of Italy is much cooler than the south, since this region is further from the equator as well as
the higher altitude. Summers are warm in the northern mountains and winters are very cold,
producing the best snow and ski conditions in the early months of the year.
The southern tip of Italy dips into the Mediterranean Sea, and has hot, dry summers, with winters
being moderately temperate. In between, summers can be very hot in some regions due to the hot winds
from Africa (sirocco) and winters are cold, sometimes producing snow and fairly wet.

Language & Useful Phrases
Italian is the official language spoken in Italy, while dialects are
spoken in different regions. English, French and German are
spoken in the main cities and tourist centers.
Hello: Buongiorno or Ciao
My name is: Mi Ciamo ...
Goodbye: Arrivederci or Ciao
Thank you: Grazie
Exit: Uscita
Entrance: Entrata
Ring Road: Tangenziale
Petrol: Benzina
Diesel: Diesel
Motor Oil: Lubrificante
One-Way: Senso Unico
No Parking: Veitati parcheggiare
Four Lane Highway: Autostrada
Detour: Deviazione
Forbidden: Probito
Police: Polizia

To the left: a sinistra
To the right: a destra
To the north: a nord
To the south: a sud
To the east: a est
To the west: a ovest
One: uno
Two: due
Three: tre
Four: quattro
Five: cinque
Six: sei
Seven: sette
Eight: otto
Nine: nove
Ten: dieci

Public Holidays
2011
Jan 01
06 Jan
25 Apr
25 Apr
01 May
02 Jun
15 Aug
01 Nov
08 Dec
25 Dec
26 Dec

New Years Day
Epiphany
Easter Monday
Liberation Day
Labour Day
Anniversary of the Republic
Assumption
All Saints Day
Immaculate Conception
Christmas Day
St Stephens Day

Ligurian Coast

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

23

Stay Healthy

Stay Safe

Italian hospitals are public and offer free standard
treatments for EU residents; however for non EU
residence emergency assistance is given. North
America does not have a reciprocal health care agreement with Italy. Your comprehensive travel insurance
should cover any medical costs. Pharmacies and
chemists carry most prescriptions, however it can be
expensive, so it’s best to have your scripts filled
before you go, and carry these medicines along with
a letter from your GP explaining your medical conditions.

Most visits to Italy are free of troubles, however, as
with travel to any country there is the potential for
dangerous situations. In major tourist areas and some
big cities such as Rome and Naples, pickpockets and
bag snatchers operate, so a money belt containing
your valuables worn under your clothing is a good
idea.

Tap water is generally safe to drink, but avoid water
where there is a sign ‘Acqua Non Potabile’ it means
that the water is unsafe to drink. No vaccinations are
required to travel into Italy.

Keep your valuables out of view in your parked car to
avoid potential smash-and-grab thefts. Do not make
yourself a target by showing off expensive jewellery
and cash in public. Keep your money and credit cards in
a safe place. Respect the local customs and laws. Try
not to leave anything in your car that will tempt
thieves. The same as travelling in any foreign country,
your common sense is the most valuable possession
you can have.

Rooftops of Rome

Important Phone Numbers
113
115
118
12

Police
Fire Department
Medical Emergencies
Phone Directory Assistance

112 Carabinieri’s service (military police)
116 Italian Automobile Club for road side assistance
176 International Enquiries
1528 Traffic reports

Where to Get Help

Local Tourist Boards

USA Embassy
Via Vittorio Veneto,
119, Rome
Ph: 39 06 46741
www.italy.usembassy.gov

Italian Government Tourist Office
630 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1565
New York, NY 10111
PH: 212-245-5618
www.italiantourism.com

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

24

Key Facts on Italy
Location: Western Europe
Area: 116,305 sq. miles
Capital: Rome, population 2.6 million

Largest City: Rome, followed by Milan
Population: 60.1 million
Population Density: 519 per sq. mile

Geography:
Italy is located in Southern Europe, consisting of a peninsula that extends into the
central Mediterranean Sea. Italy shares its land borders with France, Switzerland, Austria and Slovenia.
The climate is mostly Mediterranean, varying between hot and dry in the south and Alpine in the far north. The
terrain is mostly rugged, hilly and mountainous with coastal lowlands. The Italian Alps, particularly the Apennine Mountains, form the backbone of the northern boundary. Italy is home to active volcanos, including Etna,
Vesuvius and Stromboli. The highest point in Italy is Mont Blanc which is just over 4,700 meters above sea level. There are several islands that also form part of Italy, especially Sicily and Sardinia.

Time Zone:
Italy is in the Central European Time Zone, which is one hour ahead of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT+1).
In summer Italy observes daylight savings, when the time is shifted forward one hour (GMT+2).

Communications:
Telephones:
The country code when phoning Italy is (39). Public phones are available across Italy, however you will need to
use a phone card as coins are not accepted. Phone cards can be purchased from newsstands or tobacco shops.
When in Italy and calling a local or interstate number you need to enter the correct area code, then the phone
number, eg to call Rome dial (06) + phone number, or to call Venice dial (041) + phone number.
When calling a mobile phone, drop the zero (0) of the area code then dial the number. Within Italy, roaming
agreements exist with most international mobile phone companies.
Internet:
As with most countries, there are more and more internet cafes across Italy. Most urban areas have internet
cafes, and there are a growing number of Wi-Fi hotspots. Most international airports will offer internet access.
Post:
Stamps are sold in post offices and tobacconists. Post offices are open Monday to Friday 8.30am – 5.00pm,
with some post offices in larger cities open on Saturday till 12.00pm.

Measurements
Italy uses the metric system of measurement:
1 millimetre (mm) = 0.03937 inches
1 centimetre (cm = 0.3937 inches
1 metre (m) = 1.0936 yd
1 kilometre (km) = 0.6214 mile

1 milligram (mg) = 0.0154 grain
1 gram (gm = 0.0353 oz
1 kilogram (kg) = 2.2046lb
1 tonne (t) = 0.9842 ton

Temperature is measured in degrees Celsius.

Electricity
220 volts AC, 50 Hz. Electrical appliance plugs have two round prongs, not flat so a European plug adaptor will
be necessary. These can be purchased at electrical appliance stores in Italy.

Shopping hours
Normal trading hours in the larger cities and tourist areas in Italy are 9.00am – 1.00pm, then 3.00/4.00pm –
7.30/8.00pm.

Smoking
Since July 2005, Italy has banned smoking in all enclosed spaces, including bars and restaurants. Smoking is
permitted in special sealed off areas fitted with smoke extractors, in open spaces and in private homes.

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

25

Italian Money Matters
Currency

Credit Cards

The Euro is the local currency of Italy.
EURO (€)
Notes are in denominations of €500, 200, 100, 50, 20,
10 and 5.
Coins are in denominations of €2 and €1, and 50, 20,
10, 5, 2 and 1 cents.

Major credit cards are widely accepted across Italy,
particularly Amex, Visa and Mastercard and can be
used for most purchases, in hotels and restaurants.
Use the following numbers to report lost or stolen
credit cards:

Currency Exchange
The best places to change cash in Italy is either at
banks or post offices, where they offer the best rates
of exchange. You can also exchange cash at the airport or Bureau de Change however the exchange
rates may be more expensive.

Amex: 800 914 912
Mastercard: 800 870 866

Travelex: 800 872 050
Visa: 800 874 155

Traveler’s Cheques

Banking Hours:
Banks are open in Italy Monday to Friday 8.35am to
4.00pm and closes for an hour over lunch. In major
cities and tourist areas some banks are open over the
lunch period. Banks do not open on Saturday or
Sunday.

ATMs
ATM’s are called Bancomat, and are available in cities
and small towns across Italy. Look for the ATMs that
show the Cirrus of Bankmate symbol as these will
accept foreign debit cards.
.

Traveler’s cheques are still used in Italy, however
they’re being outdated by credit and debit cards. It’s
a good idea to have cheques made in large
denominations to reduce commission charges. You
may need a form of photo identification to cash
traveler’s cheques.

Tax
Value added tax of around 20% is added to most
goods and services in Italy, known locally as IVA
(Imposta de Valore Aggiunto)

Tipping
Tipping is not expected, however when good service
warrants it, leaving a 10% tip would be appreciated.
The same applies in bars. Porters at major hotels will
expect a tip. It isn’t common to tip taxi drivers.

Florence

Genoa

Milan

Naples

Palermo

Rome

Turin

Trieste

Venice

Bari

Bologna

Bari

Mileage Chart:

681

784

966

899

322

734

482

1019

955

806

106

285

218

640

1415

408

338

308

159

268

324

534

1345

302

442

414

265

156

758

1569

526

174

536

387

858

1633

626

139

420

284

811

232

932

948

799

Bologna

681

Florence

784

106

Genoa

996

285

268

Milan

899

218

324

156

Naples

322

640

534

758

Palermo

734

1415 1345 1569 1633

811

Rome

482

408

302

526

626

232

1043

Turin

1019

338

442

174

139

932

1743

702

Trieste

995

308

414

336

420

948

1689

715

551

Venice

806

269

265

387

284

899

1540

567

415

858

1043 1743 1689 1540

www.autoeurope. com

700

716

567

551

415
165

Tuscany Road

165

1-800-223-5555

26

Tropea, Calabria

This touring information has been created to be used as a guide only. Auto Europe is not liable for any misinformation, typographical errors, etc.
related to the information contained in this guide. Auto Europe would like
to thank Italian Tourist Board for their assistance in producing this guide.
For further information, please visit www.italiantourism.com.
Pub Date:
1/1/11

www.autoeurope. com

1-800-223-5555

27

