JAPAN E SE TR AFF I C
RE GU L AT I O N S
FOR SOFA LICENSED DRIVERS

M C I PAC- M CB B
I N S TA L L AT I O N SA F E T Y O F F I CE

JULY 2020

TAB LE O F CO N T E N T S
Contact Phone Numbers.............................................................................................................................. Pg. 3
Introduction.......................................................................................................................................... Pg. 4
Japanese Traffic Regulations Overview........................................................................................................ Pg. 5
Chapter 1: Driving Privileges...................................................................................................................... Pg. 12
Chapter 2: Accident Reporting.................................................................................................................... Pg. 14
Chapter 3: Rules of the Road........................................................................................................................ Pg. 15
Japanese Traffic Signs and Road Marking................................................................................................... Pg. 20

CO N TAC T PH O N E N U M B E R S
POV LICENSING OFFICE (CAMP FOSTER, BLDG. 5831)
645-7219

POV LICENSING OFFICE (CAMP COURTNEY, BLDG. 4319)
622-6202

INITIAL TESTING:
Monday through Friday 0800 and 1000 (Check in starts 30 minutes prior)

RENEWALS, DUPLICATES, REINSTATEMENTS, RE-TESTING
AND MISC. CUSTOMER SERVICE:
(Foster) Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday from 1230-1600
(Courtney) Monday-Thursday 1230-1600

OFFICE CLOSURES:
Lunch – Monday-Friday 1130-1230
(Foster) Wednesday afternoons from 1130-1630
(Courtney) Friday afternoons from 1130-1630
Federal Holidays

3

I N TRO D U C T I O N
1. PURPOSE
This handbook covers common elements of Japanese traffic regulations and laws, where applicable, for Status
of Forces Agreement (SOFA) sponsored personnel, i.e. U.S. armed forces, government civilian employees,
family members, and contractors.

2. GENERAL
a. The operation of privately owned vehicles (POV) within Japan is considered a privilege agreed upon between
U.S. Forces Japan and the Japanese Provincial Government. Like all high-level agreements of this nature,
adherence to local laws and regulations are critical to ensure the agreement remains in good standing. Driving
privileges can be revoked through formal Traffic Court adjudication or simply through command administrative
action based on the desires and needs of the commander.
b. The operation of a motor vehicle within Japan carries similar responsibilities and consequences as operating
a motor vehicle in the U.S. with few exceptions. A significant difference under Japanese law involves
categorizing anyone with a motor vehicle operator’s license as being a “professional driver”. While driving
in the U.S. is more or less taken for granted these days for anyone 16 years of age or older, Japanese citizens
must devote considerable time and money toward obtaining their license through a government approved
professional driving school. As such, traffic accidents that result in personal injury or death frequently lead to
criminal prosecution under article 211 of the Japanese Penal Code, “Injury or Death Through Occupational or
Professional Negligence.”
c. Penalties can be costly and at-fault drivers will typically be subject to the Japanese traffic law. SOFA licensed
drivers are subject to steeper fines and more severe penalties for non-injury related traffic offenses such as DUI/
DWI, speeding, and illegal parking.

3. TRAFFIC SIGNS
Traffic signs used throughout Japan are considered international standard road signs. Vehicle operators licensed
anywhere outside the United States should find the road signs depicted in Appendix A recognizable.

4. DISCLAIMER
a. This handbook includes traffic safety regulations/requirements while operating a motor vehicle on Marine
Corps Installations in Okinawa specifically. Personnel licensed by and/or operating motor vehicles aboard
Kadena Air Base (Air Force) and Torii Station are subject to the provisions written in Kadena Air force
Instruction 31-204 (Kadena Air Base Motor Vehicle Traffic Supervision) and United States Army Regulation
Japan Supplement 1 AR190-5 for Torii Station.
b. This handbook is generic in nature and does not cover every possible scenario a SOFA licensed driver may
find themselves faced with when operating a motor vehicle on/off base. Drivers are reminded to remain vigilant,
obey all traffic laws, and drive defensively at all times to ensure safe navigation of a motorized vehicle during
your overseas tour.
4

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
1. TRAFFIC LANES
a. A primary rule throughout Japan dictates all vehicles (motorized or pedaled) remain to the far left side of the
roadway where road conditions permit. Vehicles may partially cross or fully cross over multiple lanes to reach
the far right side of the roadway under the following circumstances:
1)

When traveling on multi-lane roadways.

2)

Whenever the width of the left half of the road is insufficient for a vehicle to proceed.

3)

Whenever a vehicle is unable to proceed on the left side of the road due to road damage, road 			
construction work, or other impediments.

4)

Whenever attempting to pass another vehicle.

5)

When merging across multi-lane roadways in order to make a right hand turn.

b. Vehicle may pass other vehicles under the conditions prescribed above when the center of the road is marked
by a solid or broken WHITE line. The following road markings prohibit passing.
1)

Solid yellow centerline = No passing from either lane.

2)

Double yellow centerline = No passing from either lane.

3)

Solid yellow centerline = No passing from the lane nearest the solid yellow line.

CAUTION: WHEN OPERATING A VEHICLE A NIGHT
DURING INCLEMENT WEATHER, LANE SEPARATION
LINES TEND TO “FADE” DUE TO THE TYPE OF PAINT USED
ON JAPANESE ROADWAYS.
c. Whenever a sidewalk is separated from the roadway, vehicles must
travel on the roadway. However, a vehicle may cross the sidewalk when
this is the only way to enter or exit a business, private residence, or similar
location. Pedestrians on sidewalks and crosswalks have the right of way at
all times.
d. Vehicles MUST NOT be driven into safety zones.
e. Lanes designated for specific types of vehicles (bus lanes for example),
are required to travel in the specific lanes designated for that type of
vehicle.
f. Bus Exclusive or Preferred Lanes are designated “priority” for public
buses, school buses and taxi cabs. All other vehicles, with the exception of
motorcycles are required to move out of the bus lane immediately when a
bus or taxi approaches from the rear.
5

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
(CO N T.)
f. Bus Exclusive or Preferred Lanes are designated “priority” for public buses, school buses and taxi cabs. All
other vehicles, with the exception of motorcycles are required to move
out of the bus lane immediately when a bus or taxi approaches from the
rear.
g. Bus exclusive lanes are for buses, taxicabs with passengers, and
motorcycles exclusively during certain hours of the day. These times
will be clearly marked on roadways. The only time POV’s are allowed
in the bus exclusive lane is to make a left turn. In this instance, you can
move into the bus exclusive lane 100 feet (30 meters) prior to your turn,
provided you do not interfere with a bus or taxi’s right of way.
h. When a public bus is signaling to leave a bus stop, no vehicle shall
impede or interfere with the bus unless doing so means abruptly changing
speed or traffic lanes which could cause an accident in an adjacent traffic
lane.
NOTE: Between the hours of 0730-0900 and 1730-1900 on HWY 58, the far left lane is strictly for buses,
motorcycles, and designated vehicles only.
i. The following requirements must be adhered to
when meeting a bus (school bus, The Green Line) on
installation:
(1) When the bus stops, do NOT proceed. All
vehicles, in both directions must stop immediately
until the bus moves or the bus driver signals the
vehicles to proceed.
(2) Pay close attention to pedestrians (children)
disembarking from a bus to ensure they do not
attempt to cross the street once the bus leaves the
stop.

2. COMMON “RULES OF THE ROAD”
a. Motorcycles are restricted to the far left side of the roadway on Highway 58 from Naha Port to Kadena Circle
as well as roads 329 except within 100 feet (30 meters) of making a right turn.
b. Vehicles will not enter any area of the roadway marked or blocked to impede motorized vehicle traffic.
c. Vehicles must come to a complete stop at all stop lines, pedestrian crosswalks (when occupied), or at all
uncontrolled intersections where stopping is required by law.
6

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
(CO N T.)
d. When three or more adjoining lanes in the same direction of travel occur, the far right lane is considered the
passing lane.
e. No vehicle may change its direction of travel without sufficiently signaling the intention to do so regardless of
whether a turning lane is provided or not.

3. COMMON TRAFFIC RULES FOR MOTOR VEHICLES ON
NATIONAL EXPRESSWAY AND EXCLUSIVE ROADWAYS
a. Motor Vehicles entering the primary lane
of travel on an Expressway must use the
speed–acceleration lane to enter.
b. Motor vehicles intending to exit an
Expressway must travel in the lane nearest
the exit in the speed-deceleration lane if
provided.
c. Motor vehicles attempting to merge into a
primary lane of travel shall not obstruct the
passage of vehicles already traveling in the
primary lane of travel.
d. It is the vehicle operator’s responsibility
to ensure a vehicle is mechanically sound,
properly serviced, and cargo secured prior
to traveling on an Expressway or Vehicle Exclusive Roadway. Violation of this requirement, either through
negligent breakdown or cargo loss, may result in monetary fines and/or penal action (confinement).
e. Should the need arise to stop a vehicle due to malfunction or breakdown, the vehicle must be moved
completely off the Expressway and warning devices (flares/safety triangles) posted to clearly indicate the
vehicle is stopped for emergency maintenance reasons.
f. Vehicles stopped on Expressways at night are required to display parking lights and/or emergency flashers and
road flares as needed. It is recommended flashers be used any time a vehicle is stopped along a roadway.

4. SPEED LIMITS
a. Speed limit signs are depicted in kilometers per hour (km/h). For example, Figure 6 means 60 km/h, not 60
mph. Speedometers similar to Figure 7 on all Japanese, European, and U.S. modeled vehicles must depict km/h.
b. Posted speed limits are significantly lower than most European and U.S. drivers are accustomed to. The
congested-narrow roadways throughout Japan dictate that reduced speed limits must be observed to ensure
public safety.
7

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
(CO N T.)
c. Other than Expressways, the maximum speed limit for motorized vehicles operating off U.S. Installations is
as follows:
(1) The maximum speed is 80 km/h for all trucks less than
5 tons, and all passenger vehicles (including buses and
motorcycles with 125 cc+ engine displacement)
(2) The maximum speed is 60 km/h for trucks over 5 tons, all
special vehicles (cement trucks, wreckers), and motorcycles
under 125cc.
(3) The maximum speed is 30 km/h for any 2-wheeled
vehicle under 50cc.
d. When traveling on Expressways and Exclusive Use
Roadways, vehicles will not operate lower than the posted
minimum speed limit unless it is unsafe to do so due to
hazardous weather/road conditions.
e. When following vehicles, Japanese law requires drivers to maintain adequate distance to prevent colliding
with the vehicle being followed in the event the vehicle makes an abrupt stop or turn. Drivers should avoid
making last minute stops or turns. A general safety measure is to apply the 3-4 second rule when driving
conditions permit. To calculate the 3-4 second rule pick a stationary object along the traveled roadway. Once
the vehicle in front of you crosses that point, begin counting. You should reach that object within 3-4 seconds.
Note that in highly congested traffic areas it will be difficult to apply this rule so drivers must remain vigilant.
Additionally, motorcycles require more of a following distance due to a shorter stopping distance.

5. OVERTAKING AND PASSING
“Passing” means going around a slower vehicle to the right on a two-way roadway. “Overtaking” refers to one
vehicle moving past a slower vehicle on a one-way or multi-lane roadway.
a. Overtaking and passing violations account for a high percentage of motor vehicle mishaps in Japan due to the
limited availability of dedicated passing lanes on standard roadways. Use caution when passing slower vehicles.
b. Vehicles attempting to pass another vehicle must typically pass to the right of the vehicle being overtaken.
Certain conditions permit passing on the left; multi-lane roadways for example or when a vehicle stops in front
of you or slows its speed to make a turn. Additional passing restrictions include:
(1) Passing a vehicle if it indicates or appears to be passing another vehicle (dual passing).
(2) Not passing if the vehicle ahead is proceeding parallel with or same speed as another vehicle (side by side).
8

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
(CO N T.)
(3) Drivers shall not zigzag (cut) between lanes of traffic that are proceeding slowly or when traffic has stopped.
The restriction not only applies to intersections, but any location along the roadway where traffic is proceeding
at a slow pace.
(4) Passing is prohibited within 30 meters of a crosswalk or intersection, on blind curves, near the top of
upgrades or on steep downgrades, inside tunnels (unless multi-lane roadway), and in designated “No Passing
Lanes” as marked by a posted traffic sign.

6. PARKING AND STOPPING
a. “No Parking Zones” and/or “No Stopping Zones”
are designated by posted traffic signs as depicted in
Appendix C. Figure 8 depicts a Safety Zone designation
– these can be found in front of fire departments, police
stations, hospitals, or areas entering mainstream traffic.
b. Drivers are permitted to stop at posted areas along the
roadway under the following circumstances:
(1) When executing a temporary stop to clear the lane
of travel for emergency vehicles, as directed by police
officer, or to avert danger.
c. Drivers are not permitted to stop and park along roadway under the following circumstances:
(1) Within 5 meters or less of fire station, fire hydrant, or fire station truck entrance/exit road.
(2) Within 1 meter or less of a fire alarm.
(3) Temporary stops at designated intersections or crosswalks as required by law.
d. When parking meters are installed, drivers are required to activate the meter unless otherwise posted. If the
time limits are exceeded, vehicles may be towed. Recovering a vehicle after it has been towed can be costly and
time consuming.
e. Parking a vehicle in any of the following locations is considered a violation of Japanese law unless
permission is granted beforehand by a local police box having jurisdiction over the proposed parking location:
(1) Within 3 meters or less of a motor vehicle entrance/exit that provides access to main roadway (example:
McDonald’s entry/exit on Highway 58 across from Camp Lester).
(2) Within 1 meter or less of a fire alarm.
(3) Within 5 meters or less of a roadway construction project.

9

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
(CO N T.)
(4) Many roadways within U.S. Installations are designated as fire lanes. Be aware of painted curbs (red/yellow)
as these designate either no parking or fire lanes.
(5) Parking on grass or bare terrain on U.S. Installations is prohibited unless where otherwise posted.
f. No vehicle will park in any location where there is less than 0.5 meters of clear-space between the vehicle and
the roadway. This does not apply for temporary stops to load or unload cargo or people, when the driver leaves
the vehicle temporarily, or to provide emergency response to an ill or injured person.
g. Abrupt vehicle stops are to be avoided unless required to avoid an accident.
h. When a vehicle is stopped to load or discharge people or cargo, it must be stopped as close as possible to the
left edge of the roadway and in such manner the vehicle does not impede traffic.
i. On a one-way street, and if so designated by a posted traffic sign, vehicles parked along the right side of the
roadway.
j. Designated parking spots may have police imposed time limits to prevent continuous parking. Vehicle
operators need to verify time limits if parking for an extended time period.
k. A police officer may order a vehicle to be moved or parked in a different manner so as not to obstruct the
flow of traffic. When the vehicle operator is not available, police may have the vehicle moved up to 50 meters
from where it was originally parked to help prevent a hazardous condition. If moving the vehicle 50 meters does
not solve the problem, the vehicle may be impounded. The vehicle operator assumes all costs associated with
moving or impounding the vehicle.

7. ROADWAY INTERSECTIONS
a. Vehicle right-of-way at uncontrolled intersections is observed as follows:
(1) Vehicles traveling on priority road have the right-of-way
(2) A vehicle approaching an intersection from the left has the right-of-way over a vehicle approaching the
intersection from the right.
b. Any roadway with a centerline or traffic lane that crosses through an intersection is considered the priority
road and vehicles traveling on this road have the right of way.
c. Drivers entering or traveling through an intersection are required to pay attention to other vehicles in the
intersection as well as pedestrians that may be in crosswalks close in proximity to the intersection.
d. Vehicles shall not enter an intersection even if a traffic signal is green if doing so will block cross traffic due
to stalled rush-hour traffic.
10

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C
R E G U L AT I O N S OV E RV I E W
(CO N T.)
e. Vehicles shall not enter crosswalks, railroad crossings, or any other portion of the road that may impede
vehicle or pedestrian cross traffic due to stalled rush-hour traffic.
f. Left turns on a red traffic light after a complete stop are prohibited off military
installations unless otherwise permitted by a traffic control device (green signal or a
white sign with blue arrow).

8. VEHICLE SIGNALING
When making a lane change or turning any direction, vehicle operators are required
to use either the vehicle’s turn signal or a hand signal at least 30 meters prior to an
intended turn or lane change. Drivers should ensure vehicle signals are turned off
after the lane change or turn has been made.

9. USE OF VEHICLE HORN.
It is not acceptable to sound a vehicles horn unless where required by law or to avert
a hazard.

10. HEADLIGHT USE DURING INCLEMENT WEATHER
Japanese traffic law does not require the use of headlights during periods of reduced visibility
from inclement weather. However, headlight use is mandatory aboard all
U.S. Installations and highly encouraged during reduced visibility.

11. VEHICLE MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Under Japanese traffic law, police officers have the right to stop a vehicle when the vehicle does not appear to
be mechanically sound or safe to be on the road. Police officers may also conduct an on the-spot vehicle
inspection and provide the vehicle operator with an itemized maintenance list. Police officers may also affix
a sticker to the vehicle, clearly visible to all, denoting that the vehicle is in need of maintenance. The sticker
can only be removed by a police officer after all discrepancies to the vehicle have been repaired and certified.
SOFA licensed drivers should note that vehicles must be inspected every two years for a Japanese Compulsory
Insurance (JCI). Vehicles passing JCI must display an up to date sticker in their vehicle’s windshield. Vehicles
that do not pass this inspection, or vehicles with expired stickers are not allowed to be driven. Contact the Joint
Vehicle Registration Office on Camp Foster for further information at 645-7481.

11

C H A P T E R 1: D R I V I N G PR I V I L E D G E S
1. IMPLIED CONSENT
Any person subject to this privilege shall be deemed to have consented to evidentiary tests of their blood, breath
and/or urine to determine the blood alcohol or drug content (BAC). This consent applies when lawfully stopped,
detained, apprehended, or cited for any driving offense committed while operating or in physical control of a
motor vehicle in Japan, whether on or off a military installation. If a licensed driver is suspected of Driving
under the Influence (DUI) of drugs or alcohol and refuses at any time to give a sample of their blood, breath, or
urine, will be automatically considered as a refusal. Any person deemed deceased, unconscious, or otherwise in
a condition rendering them incapable of refusal, shall be deemed not to have withdrawn their consent and such
tests may be administered whether or not such person has been told that their failure to submit or to complete
the test will result in revocation of their driving privileges.

2. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES
a. The MCB Traffic Court magistrate will adjudicate all traffic cases and will suspend/revoke driving privileges
as deemed appropriate by traffic court requirements.
b. Commanding Officers may also revoke service member driving privileges by submitting a formal letter to
the Director of the Installation Safety Office requesting suspension of service member’s license along with the
physical copy of the SOFA license.

3. RESTRICTIONS ON USE AND OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
a. Authorized drivers will not rent, lend, or permit the use or operation of their POVs by persons other than
those who possess a valid operator’s permit (USFJ Form 4EJ), except for the temporary convenience of the
owner or his or her family, such as when the vehicle is any of the following conditions:
(1) Undergoing maintenance or repair.
(2) Being shipped into or out of Japan.
(3) Stored in a parking lot or garage.
(4) Placed in temporary storage pending authorized disposition to resident of Japan.
(5) Undergoing inspection and processing at a GOJ Land & Transportation Office (LTO)
(6) Being driven by a properly licensed or authorized individual while the owner/operator is incapable of
driving (e.g., physically incapacitated, too tired, or consumed any amount of alcohol).
b. Daiko Taxi Service
(1) Daiko Taxi Service allows a SOFA member who is incapable of driving his/her vehicle (e.g., physically
incapacitated, too tired, or consumed alcohol) to employ a commercial driving service to provide an additional
driver for the purpose of returning an owner and POV to the owner’s residence.

12

C H A P T E R 1:
D R I V I N G PR I V I L E D G E S
(CO N T.)
(2) Regulations require the SOFA member to ride in his/her own vehicle as a passenger.
(3) The Daiko licensed operators providing this service shall operate the motor vehicle in accordance with
the established provisions for the motor vehicle operation aboard Marine Corps Installations as well as all
applicable Japanese traffic laws.
c. Personnel will not operate a rented or borrowed motor vehicle, including any Japanese-owned motor vehicle,
unless the following requirements are met:
(1) Operators must have a valid USFJ Form 4EJ for the type of motor vehicle operated.
(2) If the owner is unavailable (e.g., deployed, TAD, leave, etc.), operators have the owner’s written permission
in their immediate possession while operating the motor vehicle.
(3) The vehicle is covered with appropriate insurance.
d. All personnel operating a motor vehicle in Japan must produce, upon request from military or Japanese law
enforcement officials, the following:
(1) Proof of vehicle ownership or registration as required by issuing authority.
(2) A valid USFJ Form 4EJ operator’s permit supported by an official DoD Identification Card or passport with
stamp
(3) Proof of JCI and property damage liability insurance.
Note: Per USFJ INST 31-205, Chap 2, Figure 1. SOFA Status/Permanent Party Members are not authorized to
operate SOFA plated vehicles with an International Driver’s permit (IDP)
e. Driving without a SOFA license
(1) Driving without a valid driver’s license, aiding and abetting another to drive without a valid driver’s license,
improper acquisition of a driver’s license and knowingly loaning a vehicle to someone who does not possess
a valid driver’s license can result in a fine and or punishment of up to 3 years confinement and no more than
500,000 yen.
(2) Anyone who gets in a vehicle knowing the driver does not possess a valid driver’s license can receive a fine/
punishment of 500,000 yen or up to 3 years confinement.

13

C H A P T E R 2 : ACC I D E N T R E PO R T I N G
1. ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTING
Policy. Persons involved in a motor vehicle accident shall immediately report the occurrence to the nearest
military law enforcement agency; if off-base, to the Japanese police by expeditious means.
a. Whenever the driver of a vehicle fails to or is physically incapable of reporting an accident and occupant in
the vehicle at the time of the accident is capable of doing so, the occupant shall report the accident.
b. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, or the death of, any person, or
property damage shall immediately stop their vehicle at the scene of such accident (or as close thereto as
possible) and remain at the scene until military police arrive.
c. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident shall give his/her
name, address, vehicle registration number, name of insurer, insurance
policy number, insurance expiration, and upon request show his/her
permit to any person injured in the accident or to the driver, occupant,
or person attending any vehicle involved in such accident. The same
information shall be provided to any law enforcement personnel at the
scene of the accident or later investigation.
d. Duty of witness to Remain at Accident Scene
(1) Witnesses to an accident shall not depart the scene until their identity has been furnished to law enforcement.
(2) Witnesses to an accident shall give any assistance needed when requested by law enforcement.
e. For all off-base accidents, military police will respond to the scene upon notification. In such accidents,
military police will assist Japanese police and the parties involved in exchanging information and instruct SOFA
personnel to report to their insurance company.
f. The owner/operator of every vehicle involved in a traffic accident shall report the circumstances of their
accident to their respective insurance company that issued a policy on the vehicle involved.
g. The report shall be made within 72 hours unless the owner and/or driver are hospitalized or otherwise
incapable of doing so.
h. Solatium Payments and Condolence Procedures: Where an incident
results in serious injury or death to a Japanese national, you should
make a solatium payment of up to 50,000 yen for serious injuries or
100,000 yen for fatalities. Under certain circumstances, your service
commander may make such payments if you are financially unable
to do so. Japanese custom dictates that a condolence visit be made to
the injured party or to the surviving family and that appropriate fruit,
candy or floral gifts be presented.

14

C H A P T E R 3 : R U L E S O F T H E ROA D
1. ALCOHOL STANDARDS
a. Driving Under the Influence/Driving While Intoxicated
(1) No person may operate or be in physical control of any motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicants,
including beverages, drugs, or any combination.
a. If a person’s Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is determined to be a level of .03 to .079 percent by weight
of alcohol in the person’s blood, the person shall be considered DUI.
b. If a person’s BAC is determined to be .08 percent or more by weight of alcohol in the person’s blood, or if
tests reflect the presence of illegal drugs, the person shall be determined to be “Driving While Intoxicated”
(DWI).
(2) When a person submits to a blood test at the request of law enforcement personnel under the provisions
of Implied Consent, only a physician, nurse, or other qualified person may withdraw blood for the purpose
of determining the alcohol or drug content herein. This limitation shall not apply to collecting breath or urine
specimens.
(3) If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test, evidence of refusal shall be admissible in any prosecution
or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was driving, operating, or in
physical control of a motor vehicle.
b. Japanese Standard
(1) Japanese police determine the degree of intoxication by use of the Kitagawa Balloon Test which measures
milligrams of alcohol per liter of expired breath. When reading of 0.15 mg/l (equivalent of .03% BAC) of
expired breath is obtained, it shall be presumed for the purposes of prosecution in Japanese courts that the
person was under the influence of alcohol.
c. Open Containers of Alcoholic Beverages. Operators and passengers of motor vehicles are prohibited from
having open containers of alcoholic beverages in their possession.

2. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
a. Obedience to Police Officers and Other Authorities. All persons shall comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, fireman, or uniformed crossing guards to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
b. Drivers to Exercise Due Care. Every driver shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian or
any person operating a vehicle. Drivers shall give an audible signal when necessary and shall exercise proper
precautions upon observing any child, pedestrian, or any obviously confused, incapacitated, or intoxicated
person.

15

CHAPTER 3:
R U L E S O F T H E ROA D
(CO N T.)
c. Unattended Motor Vehicle. No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to remain
unattended without first stopping the engine, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake,
and when upon any grade, turning the wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
d. Unattended Children. Children nine years of age or younger will not be left unattended in a vehicle at any
time.
e. Limitations on Reverse Direction. The driver of a vehicle shall not:
(1) Drive in reverse direction unless such movement can be made safely and without interfering with other
traffic;
(2) Drive in reverse direction upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled access highway.
f. Operation of Vehicles upon Approach of an Emergency Vehicle. Upon approach of an emergency vehicle
making use of audible and/or visual signals, vehicle drivers shall yield the right of way, drive parallel to and
as close as possible to the closest edge or curb of the roadway, and immediately stop unless doing so would be
unsafe. Drivers shall stop clear of any intersection and remain in such position until the emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by law enforcement personnel.
g. Following Emergency Vehicles Prohibited. No vehicle driver shall follow any emergency vehicle making use
of audible and/or visual signals closer than 500 feet (152 meters) or park within 500 feet (152 meters) of where
an emergency vehicle has stopped to answer a call.
h. Following Too Closely. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles, traffic congestion, and condition of the highway.

3. LANE USAGE
a. One-Way Roadways and Rotary Traffic Islands. Upon roadway designated for one-way traffic by an official
traffic control device:
(1) A vehicle shall be driven only in the designated direction.
(2) When no road markings exist to indicate a separation of two or more lanes of travel, then only one lane shall
be presumed to exist and passing is prohibited.
(3) Driver shall obey the directions of official traffic control devices installed to prohibit the changing of lanes
or sections of roadway.
b. Driving on Divided Highways. When a highway is divided into two or more roadways by an intervening
space, physical barrier, or indicated section constructed to impede vehicular traffic; vehicles shall be driven only

16

CHAPTER 3:
R U L E S O F T H E ROA D
(CO N T.)
upon the left-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by traffic control devices or law
enforcement personnel.

4. MOTORCYCLES
a. Operating Motorcycles on Roadways
(1) All motorcycles are entitled to full use of a lane.
(2) The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake
and pass in any lane currently occupied by another
vehicle. Driving on the shoulder of the roadway in
order to overtake a vehicle is prohibited; this specifically prohibits “white-lining.”
(3) No person shall operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
(4) Motorcycles shall not be operated more than one abreast in a single lane.
b. Equipment for Motorcycle Riders and Passengers. All SOFA personnel operating or riding a motorcycle on or
off-base shall wear the appropriate PPE consisting of:
(1) A properly fastened (under the chin) protective helmet (DoT SNELL Approved).
(2) Impact or shatter resistant goggles or full-face shield attached to the helmet. A windshield, eyeglasses,
sunglasses or fairing alone is not considered to be proper eye protection. Devices used at night will not be
tinted.
(3) Clothing must cover the upper torso and legs; “T” shirts and shorts are prohibited.
(4) Leather boots that cover the ankles; sneakers, “tennis” shoes, or other athletic-type footwear are prohibited.
(5) Full fingered gloves.
5. Pedestrians
a. No vehicle shall overtake or pass any other vehicle stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any other location to
permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway
.

17

CHAPTER 3:
R U L E S O F T H E ROA D
(CO N T.)
6. CELL PHONES, HEADPHONES, OR OTHER LISTENING DEVICES
a. Operating a vehicle and using a cell phone is strictly prohibited unless a hands-free device is employed. (i.e.
Bluetooth earpiece, vehicle Bluetooth connectivity).
(1) When the need to use a cell phone arises, the vehicle operator must completely pull over to the left side of
the roadway and park the vehicle. It is preferred to park the vehicle in a parking area, but in the event of an
emergency, a vehicle may park as close to the left curbside as possible and into or out of curve. Hazard flashing
lights must be administered as well.
b. Wearing portable headphones, earphones, or other listening devices while operating a vehicle is strictly
prohibited.

7. ILLEGAL PARKING STICKER
a. An illegal parking sticker may be affixed to an illegally parked vehicle. The user of the illegally parked
vehicle who has received the parking sticker may be ordered to pay a fine for a parking violation.
b. Do not damage, tear, or remove the affixed illegal parking sticker until the fine has been paid. The vehicle
operator must immediately go to the nearest Bank of Japan or post office to pay the fine. Any delay in paying
the fine may cause additional fines to be assessed or driving privileges suspended.

18

CHAPTER 3:
R U L E S O F T H E ROA D
(CO N T.)
8. DRIVER’S DECALS
The following symbols must be affixed to a vehicle as deemed by the appropriate licensing authority:

NEW DRIVER
This symbol identifies a driver
as being a new driver having
one year or less of experience

ELDERLY DRIVER
These symbols identify
a driver over the age
of 70 years.

HEARING IMPAIRED

HANDICAPPED

This symbol identifies a driver as
being hearing impaired. This driver
must install an oversized rearview
mirror to reduce blind spots.

This symbol identifies a
driver or passenger who
is handicapped.

NOTE: In order to qualify for a Beginner or New Driver sticker SOFA members must not, at any point, have had another
driver license issued to them prior to being issued a SOFA license (i.e. U.S. driver’s license or approved country). Otherwise,
SOFA members are not eligible for the sticker.

9. SEAT BELTS AND CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS
a. Seat Belts are mandatory for all personnel inside a vehicle when the vehicle is operational; on and off base.
b. Child seats are mandatory for a children under the age of six years of age according to Japanese Traffic Law.

19

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C S I G N S
A N D ROA D M AR K I N G

Closed to Vehicles
and Pedestrians

Closed to all Vehicles

Do not enter

Road Close for All
Vehicles Except
Motorcycles

Road Closed for
Large Sized Trucks
and Special Duty
Vehicles

Road Closed
for Large Sized
Passenger Vehicles

Road Closed to Two
wheeled vehicles

Road Closed for
Motor Vehicles and
Motorcycles

Road Closed for
Bicycles

Left Turn Only

Left or Through
Traffic Only

Right & Left Turns
Only

Proceed Only
in Designated
Direction

Proceed on the Left

Through Traffic Only

No “U” Turn

No Right Turn

No Parking or Stopping
(Restriction applies
from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00

p.m.)

20

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C S I G N S
A N D ROA D M AR K I N G

No Parking
(Restriction applies
from 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.)

Exclusive Road for
Bicyclist

Exclusive Road
for Bicyclist &
Pedestrians

Width Limit
(2.2 meters)

Parking Limited to 60
minutes Only
(Restriction applies
from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.)

Exclusive Road for
Pedestrians

Weight Limit
(5.5 tons)

Height Limit
(3.3 meters)

Motor Vehicles
Only

Maximum Speed
Limit

Minimum Speed
Limit

Bus Exclusive Lane

Sound Horn

Bus Preferred Lane

Direction
Designated Lane

Two-Step Right Turn
for Mopeds

Safety Zone

No Passing

21

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C S I G N S
A N D ROA D M AR K I N G

Cross Walk (a)

Cross Walk (b)

Primary Road

No Pedestrian
Crossing

Direction
Designated Lane

Direction
Designated Lane

Proceed Slowly

Proceed Slowly
Main Road Has
Right of Way

Stop Before the
Stop Line

Stop

Stop
Main Road Has
Right of Way

Left Turn Permitted
on Red

One Way

Direction
(refers to the route,
facility or place
indicated by the sign)

22

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C S I G N S
A N D ROA D M AR K I N G

4-Way Intersection
Ahead

“T” Intersection

“Y” Intersection
Ahead

Right Turn Followed
by a Left Turn

Sharp Right Curve
Ahead

Right Turn

Slippery

School Zone

Traffic Signal Ahead

Caution, Prevailing
Side Wind

Merging Traffic

Number of Lanes
Reduced

Road Narrows

Two -Way Traffic

Upgrade 10%

Downgrade 10%

Under Construction

Winding Road

23

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C S I G N S
A N D ROA D M AR K I N G

No U-Turn

Max Speed Limit

No Entry on the RightHand Part of the Road for
Overtaking
(1) and (2) indicate vehicles
passing the lanes A and B must
not enter the right-hand part
of the road for overtaking.

Lane Change
Prohibited

(3) Indicates vehicles passing
the lane B must not enter the
right-hand part of the road for
overtaking.

No Parking

No Parking or
Stopping

No Entry Zone

No Stopping Zone

24

JA PA N E S E T R A F F I C S I G N S
A N D ROA D M AR K I N G
MUTIPLE CROSSWALKS

Intersections with a high volume of pedestrian
traffic may look similar to this.

SAFETY ZONE

Safety zones are no stopping zones generally
located in front of fire stations, hospitals,
and police stations.

CROSSWALK AHEAD

This symbol serves as an indicator that you are
approaching a crosswalk.

25

