Private Hire Vehicle Driver’s Handbook
Safety, equality and regulatory information for London
private hire vehicle drivers

1

Version Control
This handbook will be kept under review and may be altered or amended to reflect any
changes in the law or TfL policies and guidance.
TfL will publish this handbook on its website, and it will specify which version of the
handbook to read in preparation for a particular test in the event that it has been altered or
amended.

Version: 1.0
Date: 30 September 2021
Summary of amendments: none

2

Contents
Section 1: London PHV Driver Licensing .......................................................................... 6
Section 2: Licensing Requirements for PHVs ................................................................. 12
Section 3: Carrying out Private Hire Journeys ................................................................ 14
Section 4: Staying Safe .................................................................................................. 18
Section 5: Driver Behaviour ............................................................................................ 23
Section 6: Driving and Parking in London ....................................................................... 26
Section 7: Safer Driving .................................................................................................. 31
Section 8: Being Aware of Equality and Disability .......................................................... 38
Section 9: Safeguarding Children and Adults at Risk ..................................................... 43
Section 10: Ridesharing ................................................................................................. 46
Glossary ......................................................................................................................... 47

3

Introduction
Transport for London (TfL) is responsible for the licensing and regulation of London’s taxi
and private hire vehicle (PHV) industry to ensure a safe and reliable service for the public.
We set regulations and policies for taxi (black cab) and PHV services to protect customers,
and ensure vehicles are safe, accessible and meet strict environmental standards.
We are responsible for licensing all London’s:
•

Taxi drivers and vehicles

•

Private hire operators, drivers and vehicles

TfL sets requirements and standards for licensing and is also responsible for making sure
that licensees follow the law. We work closely with the taxi and private hire trades, the
Metropolitan Police Service and the City of London Police to ensure the safety of
passengers.
We are also responsible for delivering the Mayor's Transport Strategy which sets out the
transport vision for London between now and 2031.
PHVs play an important role in delivering passenger transport services in London and it is
essential that standards set by TfL ensure the safety of passengers and other road users.
It is also important that all licensed PHV drivers provide a professional service to their
passengers. TfL expects drivers to offer a high level of customer service, use clean and
well-maintained licensed vehicles and to fully obey the laws of the road.
This handbook provides you with essential information to help you give your passengers
the safe and professional service they expect. It also includes information on your
responsibilities as a PHV driver.
It is important that both new applicants for a licence and existing PHV drivers have a good
knowledge of all the information in this handbook.
You will therefore need to do an assessment based on the information in this
handbook as part of the licensing application process, so please read all of it
carefully. This assessment is known as the Safety, Equality and Regulatory
Understanding Assessment.
Please note that passing the Safety, Equality and Regulatory Understanding Assessment
will also mean that you have the required English language skills of reading and writing in
order to be licensed as a London PHV driver.
Some of the words in this handbook have links to the glossary section where you can find
the meanings of those words. It is important that you read these meanings and understand
what the words mean, but you will not be tested on their meanings.
This handbook also has some links to websites. You will not be tested on information
found on those websites.

4

This handbook is not a complete statement of the laws or policies that London PHV drivers
are subject to and should be used for general guidance only. Some of the laws and
policies in this handbook are the responsibility of TfL, some are the responsibility of other
authorities, and some are laws of the road. You must comply with them all and we
encourage applicants and licensees to refer directly to the applicable laws and policies and
to take independent legal advice where appropriate.

5

Section 1: London PHV Driver Licensing
To work as a London PHV driver you will need to be licensed by TfL – only then can you
carry out bookings for a London private hire operator that is also licensed by TfL
When you get your licence to work as a London PHV driver, there are a number of rules
and policies that you need to know about. This section sets out some of these rules and
policies and explains what you need to do.
Licensing requirements
To get a licence:
•

You must be aged 21 or older when you apply for your licence; there is no upper
age limit

•

You must have a full DVLA, Northern Ireland, European Union (EU) or European
Economic Area (EEA) state driving licence that is at least three years old

•

You must have the right to live and work in the UK

•

You must be a 'fit and proper' person to hold a licence. You will need to have an
enhanced criminal records check done by the Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS)

•

You must be physically fit. This will mean that you will need to have a medical
examination with a doctor who has access to all of your medical records. The
medical requirements are the DVLA Group 2 medical standards

•

You will need to take a separate test to check your ability to select and plan a route,
read a map and identify locations. The test is held in a centre approved by TfL and
conducted under exam conditions by a TfL examiner. This test is known as a
Topographical Skills Assessment

•

You will need to prove that you have at least a B1 level of ability in the English
language. B1 is a level of English in the Common European Framework of
Reference for Languages (CEFR). To prove your English language speaking and
listening skills you will need to take a test. The test is held in a TfL building and
conducted under exam conditions. Your English language reading and writing skills
will be derived from the Safety, Equality and Regulatory Understanding Assessment

Private hire driver’s licence
If your application is approved, TfL will send you a London PHV driver’s licence. Your
licence may have some conditions attached to it. For example, if you have a medical
condition, you may be required to have extra medical checks. Any conditions added to
your licence will be explained in the letter sent to you with your licence. It is very important
that you keep the letter and comply with any conditions that come with your licence. If you
do not, then your licence may be revoked.

6

As soon as you are licensed it is important that you keep in contact with us and respond to
any letters, emails or other forms of communication.
Your London PHV driver’s licence normally lasts for three years. If it is for a shorter period,
the letter that comes with the licence will explain why. You should keep your licence at
home in a safe place and give a copy of it to any licensed private hire operator(s) you are
working with.
If a police officer or TfL Authorised Officer asks to see your licence, you must let them see
it there and then or within a maximum of seven days. The PHV operator(s) you work with
must keep copies of your PHV driver’s licence and your DVLA/NI/EU/EEA driving licence.
The letter that comes with your licence contains important information about your
responsibilities as a London PHV driver, including any conditions you must meet. It is
important that you read this letter carefully and make sure you understand it.
If there are conditions on your licence which require you to provide TfL with information –
for example if you need to provide further medical information – then TfL may write to you
to remind you that the information is needed.
There are further general conditions that all licence holders need to know. These are given
below.
Your PHV driver’s badge
When you get your licence you will also receive a PHV driver’s badge (also known as
photographic ID). You must wear this badge at all times when you are working as a
PHV driver. Your PHV driver’s badge displays your name, photograph, licence number
and the date your licence period ends. Remember, your operator must give passengers
your name, photograph and vehicle details. This means that passengers can check this
information against your badge.
Example of PHV driver badge:

You must wear your badge whenever you are working as a PHV driver, including when
you are waiting to receive a booking or travelling to pick up a passenger. When you wear
it, you must make sure that it can clearly be seen by other people. This applies to all PHV
drivers unless we have given you special permission not to. This is called an exemption. If
we give you an exemption, we will send you an exemption notice. You must carry that
notice with you at all times when working as a PHV driver.

7

If a passenger asks for your licence number, you should let them see your badge so that
they can write the number down. The badge includes text in Braille which means a visionimpaired person can know that you are licensed.
Remember the badge is for you to use only. You must not allow any other person to use it
to carry out bookings.
Lost PHV driver’s badge and licence
If you lose your PHV driver’s badge or licence, or somebody steals it, report it immediately
to TfL. If your badge has been stolen you should also report it to the police and get a crime
reference number from them. Without your badge you cannot continue working as a PHV
driver.
TfL will replace your lost or stolen badge or licence. However, if you then find your original
badge or licence, you must return it to TfL. Your badge and licence are the property of TfL
at all times, including when they have passed their expiry date. You must return them
when they pass the expiry date or when you are no longer licensed.
Medical conditions
To get your licence to be a PHV driver you must be medically fit. The standards you must
meet are the DVLA Group 2 medical standards. In most cases, this will mean that you will
need to have a medical examination with someone (i.e. a doctor) who has access to your
full medical records.
You may be exempt from supplying a medical form if you:
•

Have a full or provisional (issued after January 1997) DVLA Group 2 licence or

•

Have a current London taxi driver’s licence or

•

Have a valid, current pilot’s licence issued by the Joint Aviation Authorities

TfL will remind you when a medical examination is due and send you the form you need.
You are responsible for making sure that a doctor completes the form with all the required
information about your health, and for returning the form to TfL. If you do not send TfL all
the necessary information, you might not get your licence.
From the age of 45, PHV drivers must have a medical examination each time they apply to
renew their licence. From the age of 65, PHV drivers must have a medical assessment
every year. If you do not send TfL all the necessary information you might lose your
licence. If you have an existing medical condition, extra medical examinations may be
needed.
You should tell TfL immediately if, between medical examinations, you develop a new
medical condition that may affect your ability to drive. Some examples of medical
conditions you should let TfL know about include:

8

•

Diabetes

•

Epilepsy

•

Poor eyesight or other eye conditions affecting sight

•

Heart conditions

•

High blood pressure

•

Neurological conditions (including strokes)

•

Prescription medication that may affect your ability to drive

•

Psychiatric illness

•

Any condition which the DVLA requires you to report

If you are not sure whether to tell TfL, you should contact TfL for advice
The DVLA frequently updates its medical standards so TfL recommends that you check
with the DVLA if you develop any new medical condition.
Change of address
It important that TfL has your correct home address and email address so that you can be
contacted with any information about your licence. If you change your home address, you
should tell TfL within 21 days. You should also tell us about any change to your email
address or telephone number. This is important so TfL can keep you informed of any
changes to the regulations to do with how PHVs and PHV drivers are licensed, as well as
news and events that could affect your job.
You are also required by law to tell the DVLA if you change your address. You will then get
a new driving licence with your new address on it. Details of how to do this are on the back
of your DVLA licence. The address on your PHV driver’s licence should be the same as
the address on your DVLA licence.
Other changes in personal circumstances
As a licensed London PHV driver, you must tell TfL immediately if your personal
circumstances change.
This includes:
•

If you have broken the law and have been disqualified from driving. Please note that
you will also have to return your London PHV driver’s licence and badge to TfL

•

If you are the subject of a mental health order or sexual offences order

9

•

If you are on either the Adults or Children’s Barred Lists

•

If you have a private hire or taxi driver’s licence with another licensing authority and
that authority has suspended or revoked your licence, or refused any new
application you have made

Convictions, cautions and arrests
You must tell TfL immediately if you are arrested, charged with, convicted or cautioned for
any crime. This includes any fixed penalty notices or road traffic offences that result in
penalty points on your driving licence.
You are responsible for telling TfL about any offences you have committed. Do not rely on
the police informing TfL.
If you fail to tell TfL about any convictions, you could have your licence revoked.
Other fixed penalties, parking tickets and PCNs
You do not need to tell TfL about any other penalty charge notices (PCNs) or parking
tickets that do not result in penalty points on your driving licence. However, if TfL becomes
aware that you are getting frequent PCNs and/or parking tickets, TfL may take licensing
action against you. This is because TfL expects all licensed drivers to behave responsibly.
Right to live and work in the United Kingdom
If there are restrictions on a driver’s right to live and work in the UK, TfL will add an
appropriate condition on the licence. If you are in this situation, you should make sure you
comply with these conditions and make sure you have a continuing right to work.
In particular, if you are in the UK on a student visa you will only be allowed to work for a
limited number of hours each week and you will not be allowed to be self-employed.
Complaints
If TfL receives a complaint about you or becomes aware of any behaviour that is not
satisfactory, TfL may write to you with the details and ask for your comments. It is
important that you respond to TfL’s request. TfL can only make licensing decisions based
on the information received.
Suspending or revoking a PHV driver’s licence
If for any reason your licence is revoked you must return your licence to TfL within seven
days. If you do not, or your licence has been suspended or revoked with immediate effect,
TfL may send an Authorised Officer to take it from you.

10

Revoking a driver’s private hire vehicle licence
If your PHV driver’s licence is suspended or revoked, and you are the owner of a licensed
private hire vehicle, TfL may make the decision to revoke the vehicle licence as well. TfL
will consider doing this if there is any risk to public safety. For example, if there is evidence
that the vehicle could be used as a PHV by somebody without a PHV driver licence, or if a
driver has been charged with, or convicted of, a serious violent or sexual offence.
Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS)
As part of the application process you (the applicant) must have an enhanced criminal
records check from the Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS). The DBS is a public body
that does checks on people’s backgrounds. The checks will show any convictions,
cautions, reprimands and final warnings you have had. The checks will also show if the
local police have any information that is relevant to you working as a PHV driver and if you
are on a list of people who are prevented from working with vulnerable groups. TfL uses a
separate company to arrange DBS checks for applicants - you must use this company to
get your DBS certificate. Further details are on the TfL website.

11

Section 2: Licensing Requirements for PHVs
This section gives you information on some of the licensing requirements and rules for
private hire vehicles (PHVs). Even if you do not own a licensed vehicle, you should know
about these requirements.
Licences and licence discs
Once a PHV has been licensed, the registered keeper is given a vehicle licence and
licence discs will be fixed to the front and rear windscreens of the vehicle. The registered
keeper also receives a leaflet which briefly describes the conditions of the licence.
PHV licences last for one year and the vehicle must have another licensing inspection
before a new licence can be issued.
Example of PHV licence disc:

The licence discs must not be damaged or changed in any way. You should not remove
the discs, even if you are using the vehicle for private purposes. The licence discs contain
security features which mean that the discs will be permanently damaged if you try to
remove them.
If the licence discs fixed to a PHV are damaged, lost, or stolen the vehicle owner should
contact TfL immediately so that replacement discs can be issued.
Please remember, you cannot use a vehicle for private hire purposes if the licence
discs are missing, have been badly damaged or their appearance has been spoilt in
any way.
In some exceptional circumstances the vehicle might be given an exemption which means
that the licence discs do not have to be displayed. In these cases, you will receive an
exemption notice which you (the driver) must carry at all times when the vehicle is being
used as a PHV.

12

Insurance
Every PHV must have hire or reward insurance. The insurance policy must be valid when
the vehicle is licensed, and at all times when the vehicle is being used as a PHV.
We encourage you to carry details of the vehicle's valid hire or reward insurance policy
whenever you are working as well as evidence that you are insured to drive the vehicle
under that policy (for example, if the vehicle is insured by your operator).
You can carry the insurance details or display them within the vehicle.
You must make details of the insurance available to the police when you are asked for
them. You must also provide insurance details to a passenger or member of the public if
the vehicle you are driving is involved in a collision.
Collision damage
Vehicles must be kept in good condition. If you own your PHV, you must tell TfL within 72
hours of any collision that affects the safety, performance, appearance or comfort of the
vehicle. The vehicle may need to be re-examined before it can continue to be used as a
PHV.
Information about vehicles
There may be circumstances where TfL has important information about the vehicle you
are driving – for example, the manufacturer may have told TfL about a fault with the
vehicle that means it needs to be returned to the manufacturer for repair. If you are the
registered keeper of the vehicle TfL or the manufacturer may write to you to explain what
you need to do to get your vehicle fixed. You should always follow the instructions in the
letter. A letter from TfL may also explain that the vehicle cannot be used for private hire
purposes until it has been fixed.
It is important that you read any letters you receive from TfL or the manufacturer carefully.

13

Section 3: Carrying out Private Hire Journeys
Private hire services are an important part of London’s transport network, providing a wide
range of services for residents and visitors. This section covers the basic requirements for
drivers when carrying out private hire bookings.
Bookings
As a London PHV driver, you can only carry out bookings that you have received from a
licensed London PHV operator. You must carry out these bookings in a London licensed
PHV that has PHV licence discs on display (unless exempt).
TfL’s website has a licence checker tool which contains the details of all licensed private
hire drivers, vehicles and operators. This is a public register which you and anyone else
can use.
You should never accept a booking from an unlicensed operator – if you are in any doubt
you should ask the operator for their operator licence number and check their details using
the online licence checker tool
It is important to remember that a PHV is not a taxi (black cab). This means that:
•

You are not allowed to pick people up on the street or at stations or airports unless
they have booked you through a licensed operator. This includes the street outside
your operator’s centre

•

You must not allow any passenger to enter your vehicle before you have received
the booking from your operator

•

You must not give any sign or say anything to a member of the public that suggests
that you are available for hire, without a booking

You must not encourage any member of the public to approach you or your PHV if they
don’t have a valid booking. If someone does come up to you, you are allowed to hand out
a business card with the number of your operator on it or you can provide other contact
details such as a website
Booking details
Before the start of each journey, your operator is required to record certain information
about the booking. Although you are not personally responsible for collecting or recording
these details, you should know about this requirement and let your operator know about
any changes. For example, tell your operator if the final destination changes.
The information your operator must record includes:
•

The date the booking is made and, if different, the date of the journey

•

The name of the person the booking is for
14

•

The agreed time and place for picking up passengers, or, if more than one location,
the agreed time and place for picking up the first passenger

•

The main destination

•

The agreed fare or estimated fare

•

The name or other identification of the driver carrying out the booking and

•

The registration number or other identification of the vehicle that will carry out the
booking

Operating centres in late night venues
If your operator has a licence to operate from a late-night venue, (e.g. a pub or nightclub)
the operator can only take bookings inside the venue at the booking location specified on
their licence.
You can only accept a fare if the passenger has booked the journey through a licensed
London operator. You must not approach people on the pavement or outside a late night
venue to offer them private hire services. If you do this, you may be committing an offence
and could be prosecuted. If a customer approaches you, then you should tell them to
contact a licensed private hire operator to make a booking.
You, as the driver, are responsible for parking your vehicle, the noise it makes and for your
own behaviour. Please think about the environment around the operating centre and how
noise, traffic and/or customer movement may affect the people living in the
neighbourhood.
Do not behave in an anti-social manner, do not leave litter in the street or road, do not go
to the toilet in a public place, and do not leave your engine running. Have respect for the
area you are working in.
Remember, if TfL or the police get complaints about driver behaviour, they will investigate
and, depending on the sort of complaint they receive, it could result in licensing action or
prosecution.
Airports
Airports are private property and can make their own rules (byelaws) about taxis and
PHVs.
Heathrow Airport has its own set of byelaws which you can find here. You should know
about these in case you get a booking to or from the airport.
You cannot enter Heathrow Airport to pick up passengers unless you have a booking from
your operator or you are parking in an official car park or the PHV Authorised Vehicle Area
to wait for a booking.
When picking up passengers you must always use an official car park.

15

You should not wait in local car parks or residential streets. Remember that the taxi ranks
at Heathrow Airport and London City Airport are for licensed taxis (black cabs) only. You
must not stop, wait, pick up or drop off passengers at the airport taxi ranks.
Journeys outside Greater London
As a London licensed PHV driver, in a London licensed PHV, you may carry out a private
hire booking (accepted by a licensed London PHV operator) where the pick-up point
and/or the destination for the journey is outside Greater London as long as the booking
has been accepted by a licensed London PHV operator.
If you have any doubts about whether the journey is legal or not, you should ask your
operator.
Fares
TfL has no power to set or control the fares charged by PHV operators. However, it is
important that all customers understand the fare they are going to be charged.
Your operator is responsible for either agreeing a fare for the journey with the passenger
or giving them an accurate estimate before a journey starts.
If your passenger decides to change the destination of their journey, asks you to pick up
extra passengers, or has extra luggage, you should tell your operator as soon as it is safe
for you to do so. Your operator will then be able to update the fare or estimated fare for the
journey.
You should check with your operator what to do if your passenger disagrees with the fare
or is unable to pay it at the end of the journey. You should also check with your operator
what the arrangements are for giving out receipts.
Lost property
At the end of the journey, you should remind passengers to make sure they have not left
anything behind. You should also check your vehicle for lost property after every journey. If
you have put any of the passenger’s luggage in the boot, do not forget to check that too.
If you find any lost property you should take it back to your operator. The operator will
keep the property and make a record of it. By law your operator must keep a record of any
items of lost property they hold. Let your operator know as soon as you find anything in
case the passenger has already been in contact about the item.

16

Suspicious items and behaviour
Terrorist attacks can happen at any time or any place without warning.
Items left in your vehicle are likely to be items passengers have left behind, but if you are
suspicious of an unattended item, call the police immediately on 999 and follow their
instructions.
Be aware of what is going on around you and of anything that seems different or unusual
or doesn’t feel right, or anyone that you think is acting suspiciously. It could be someone
you know, a passenger or even someone or something you notice when you are driving
that doesn’t feel quite right. You can report your concerns about suspicious activity to the
confidential police anti-terrorist hotline on 0800 789 321.
Don’t worry about wasting police time or getting someone into trouble. The police will
decide if the information you give is important and will treat it as private and confidential.
When a booking cannot be carried out
When an operator has accepted a booking and you have agreed to carry it out, you should
carry out that booking unless you have a very good reason.
There may be situations where you do not feel able or safe enough to take passengers, for
example if they are carrying open bottles or cans of alcohol or anything dangerous or
inflammable, or if they are acting in a violent or offensive way. If you do refuse to carry out
a booking, be polite and explain why. This could help avoid a complaint.
Make sure you tell your operator the full reasons why you did not carry out the booking.
Because the operator accepted the booking, the operator is also responsible for either
arranging for another driver to carry out the booking or to make it clear to the passenger
that it has been cancelled.
You must not refuse to take passengers because they are disabled or they are travelling
with assistance dogs. For more details, see Section 8: Being Aware of Equality and
Disability.

17

Section 4: Staying Safe
This section looks at how to keep you and your passengers safe. It covers:
•

Driver safety

•

Drugs and alcohol

•

Minimising conflict

Driver safety
Angry or violent behaviour when at work is never acceptable. If a passenger in your
vehicle becomes angry or violent you have a right to say that you will not accept that
behaviour or if that fails, and it is safe to do so, to ask them to leave.
•

You should never accept any bad behaviour towards you for any reason. Any
offensive or violent behaviour towards you because of your race, faith, sexual
orientation, disability or gender identity is a hate crime. If you experience or witness
this type of behaviour TfL urges you to report it to the police so that it can be fully
investigated and action taken against the offender. TfL advises drivers to report
incidents as soon as possible to the police on 101, or 999 in an emergency.

Protecting yourself
To provide a safe service for your passengers and to protect you as a driver you should
consider:
•

Discussing with your operator how they can help protect you from the possibility of
aggressive or violent behaviour by a passenger

•

Making sure your operator has given you booking details, such as the passenger’s
name, pick up point and destination.

•

Checking the passenger’s name and destination before they get in the vehicle – this
will help make sure the passenger doesn’t get into the wrong vehicle

•

Being clear with the passenger about exactly where you are taking them, the route
there, how long it is likely to take and what the fare will be before the journey starts

•

Letting the operator know about any change to the booking. The operator must then
tell the passenger what the new fare will be

•

Carrying a lone worker device or asking your operator to provide you with one

All these steps should reduce the risk of any disagreements.
If a passenger is aggressive or violent, tell your operator immediately and give them the
passenger’s full name and address if you know it.

18

In an emergency, call the police on 999.
Warning signs of possible aggressive behaviour
Some behaviour is a sign that someone is becoming more angry and upset. Below are
signs that someone might become aggressive:
•

Tapping their fingers

•

Crossed arms

•

Hands held tightly in fists

•

Aggressive staring

•

A raised voice

•

An angry expression

•

A sudden change in behaviour

•

A change to the voice

Trust your own feelings and never try to ignore these signs.
If you feel concerned, act immediately. Remember, the earlier you notice a possible
problem, the more choices you have to avoid it.
Drugs and alcohol
When someone has taken drugs or has drunk alcohol, it can affect their ability to think or
communicate clearly and their behaviour can be difficult to predict. In some cases they
may become aggressive.
Your operator may have warned you about any possible problems when they gave you the
booking (e.g. if the passenger sounds like they might be drunk). You can also judge the
passenger’s physical and mental condition when you pick them up. If you have concerns
then, contact your operator immediately.
If the passenger cannot communicate clearly to confirm their destination, or is unable to
walk because of drink or drugs, you have the right to refuse to take them in your vehicle.
You can do this because you cannot be sure that they have given you the correct address
or that they will be able to get out of your vehicle without help.
In this situation, if possible, insist that a friend comes with them in your vehicle, or ask to
speak to a friend of the customer by telephone to confirm the destination.
If the passenger is unconscious, extremely unwell or seems to be injured or in an
emergency situation, and there is no-one else to help them, call the emergency services
on 999 and stay with them until the services arrive. If the passenger is being aggressive or

19

violent, move somewhere that is safe for you but where you can still see the person until
the emergency services arrive.
Think about your personal safety first and do not put yourself at risk.
Reducing the risk of violence in a difficult situation
There are certain things you can do to reduce the chance of someone being violent or
aggressive towards you. These include:
•

Talking calmly and not raising your voice

•

Listening to what someone is saying and not interrupting them

•

Responding to the person’s concerns

•

Asking questions

•

Explaining things to them, not arguing

•

Having a pre-planned way to excuse yourself from a difficult situation, for example,
you can’t help them but perhaps someone at the address you are taking them to
can sort the problem out for them

•

Explaining procedures for dealing with unacceptable behaviour, for example, you
will have to stop the vehicle and possibly call the police unless they stop being
aggressive/violent

If you cannot reduce the risk of violence:
Sometimes you are not able to calm a situation. If that is the case, you should:
•

Get away from the aggressive person and exit the situation. If necessary, find
somewhere safe to stop the vehicle, turn off the engine, take the keys then get out
of the vehicle. If the passenger is planning to hurt you, they will probably get out of
the vehicle too. This gives you the opportunity to quickly get back in and lock the
doors then drive away if it is safe to do so

•

Consider using a lone worker device to let someone know that you need help

•

If an incident happens while you are away from your vehicle, get to your vehicle
when possible and try to take time to calm down before you drive off

After an incident:
•

Try to talk about what happened with a friend, a colleague or your operator

•

Find out if any support is available (there is advice on health and wellbeing on the
TfL website)

20

•

Report the incident to help avoid it happening in future

What to do if you are attacked or assaulted
It is important for you to know where you can go for help if you are attacked or assaulted.
Find out in advance what your operator’s reporting procedures are and who to go to after
an incident like this.
If something happens to you, tell your operator and if necessary, also call the police and/or
an ambulance depending on the incident.
It is important to record and report incidents that almost happened, as well as ones that
actually did happen.
When you are recording an incident try and include the following details:
•

When and where the incident happened

•

Information about the attacker (name, address if known, description of clothing,
age, gender)

•

Whether the attacker was one of your passengers

•

Brief description of the incident

•

Anything that might have caused the incident

•

Details of any witnesses

•

Type of incident (verbal threat, physical assault, written threat)

•

Description of any injuries

•

Account of the immediate action that was taken

CCTV cameras
Installing CCTV cameras into a vehicle can reduce threats and violence against drivers.
Signs in the vehicle informing passengers that CCTV is used may also help to prevent
aggressive or violent behaviour. You can buy a camera or rent one. Although this is an
extra cost, having a CCTV camera may reduce insurance premiums. This is because a
video recording can be useful evidence when there is a dispute with a passenger.
The Information Commissioner’s CCTV Code of Practice requires that signage must be
displayed where CCTV is in operation. TfL requires all PHVs fitted with a CCTV system to
display the sign shown below somewhere that is easy for passengers to see.

21

The vehicle owner can decide where to put this signage, but it must be displayed
somewhere that it does not block the driver’s view. It must also be as visible as possible to
passengers as they enter the vehicle and while they are travelling in it.
TfL CCTV sign for PHVs:

22

Section 5: Driver Behaviour
TfL expects all licensed drivers to offer Londoners and visitors a professional and safe
service. Providing excellent customer service is an important part being a London PHV
driver.
This section explains how TfL expects drivers to behave towards passengers and other
road users.
Complaints
It is important that each time a passenger gets into a PHV they receive a high quality of
service from their private hire driver.
Operators must keep details of all complaints made to them.
Operators must report to the police any complaints that involve possible crimes, so that
they can be investigated.
Although your operator will normally deal with complaints, passengers might contact the
police or TfL directly. They might also contact TfL if they are not satisfied with the way the
operator has dealt with their complaint. In these cases, TfL may carry out its own
investigation. If TfL does investigate a complaint that relates to you, we will provide you
with the details of the complaint and ask for your comments. As soon as you have had the
opportunity to respond to the complaint and TfL has made any other necessary enquiries,
TfL will tell you the result of that investigation. Remember, TfL can only make a decision
based on the information we receive, so it is important you respond to all our requests for
information.
If a serious complaint is made against you, or if there are a number of complaints, or there
appears to be a pattern of poor behaviour and all the ways to improve your behaviour
have been tried but have failed, TfL may have to suspend or revoke your licence.
Unacceptable behaviour
As a PHV driver, you offer an extremely important service to the travelling public. You
have a responsibility to make sure your passengers feel safe when they travel in your
vehicle. The way that you interact with them will affect the way they will feel about their
journey with you. It is important that you are professional and deal with passengers in a
way that makes them feel at ease.
You should never use a passenger’s personal contact details to start communicating with
them about anything other than the booked journey. Contacting a passenger for personal
or social reasons is unacceptable and a misuse of the passenger’s personal information.
You should never make comments or jokes about someone’s age, race, religion,
disability, sexual orientation or gender identity.
Drivers who behave in an unacceptable way will have action taken against them by TfL
and/or the police.

23

Entering the back of your vehicle
Other than in an emergency, you must not get into the back seat of your vehicle while
you have passengers on board. If you get into the back seat, you risk making your
passengers uncomfortable and your actions may be misunderstood or considered
inappropriate.
If your passenger is seriously ill, you should call the emergency services on 999
immediately. You should not try to physically check the passenger or administer first aid
yourself unless you are following the instructions of the emergency services or a medical
professional, or you have had appropriate first aid or medical training.
If your passenger is ill, or has a disability, and asks you to help them enter or leave your
vehicle, make sure you check exactly what help they are asking you for, for example to
take hold of your arm to support them. Keep any physical contact to the minimum
required to give the help your passenger asks for.
Unacceptable sexual behaviour
No type of sexual behaviour between you and a passenger is ever acceptable, even
if both of you agree to it.
TfL takes this issue extremely seriously. TfL or the police will fully investigate all
complaints and reports, and they will take appropriate action. You will lose your licence if
you are found to have acted in an unsuitable way towards a passenger.
You should never:

•

Look at or speak to a passenger in a way that makes them feel uncomfortable, for
example staring at any part of their body

•

Make any sexual remarks or comments about a passenger’s appearance or
clothing

•

Engage in conversation of a sexual nature. This includes asking questions about
someone’s sex life or telling sexual jokes

•

Touch a passenger in an unacceptable way. You should avoid any physical contact
with a passenger unless completely necessary (such as helping a person who
needs assistance into your vehicle) to reduce any misunderstanding or complaints
against you. Touching someone without their permission could be a sexual assault
and will be investigated by the police

•

Suggest having sex with a passenger

•

Offer or accept sex or sexual activity in place of a fare

•

Take part in sexual activity of any kind with a passenger (even if both you and the
passenger agree to it or the passenger suggests it)

24

•

Watch, display or share pornographic or sexual pictures, or any other sexual
material

•

Commit any other sexual offence

Your passengers expect to be treated in an appropriate way. Think about your actions and
how they might affect a passenger. Avoid any behaviour that might be understood as
being sexual, no matter how good your intentions are or how harmless you think your
behaviour is.

25

Section 6: Driving and Parking in London
This section gives general information on parking and driving in London. It does not
replace the need for you to be aware of your responsibilities under The Highway Code.
You must remember that:
•

PHVs are not allowed to drive in bus lanes

•

PHVs are not allowed to park, wait, drop off or collect passengers on a taxi rank

•

PHVs are not allowed to use or park on electric taxi charge points

A PHV is not a taxi. If a road sign shows that access is for a taxi you are not allowed
access. Here are two examples:

Bus lane sign

Electric taxi charging point sign

Stopping and waiting
Private hire drivers can stop to pick up or drop off passengers in many areas where there
are rules in place to limit waiting or stopping. You need to remember that:
•

PHV drivers should not stop in any place where they might stop other vehicles
moving or be a danger to other road users.

•

PHV drivers must not stop on zig-zag lines (for example, by pedestrian crossings,
outside schools)

You should check what signage is displayed about stopping or waiting and make sure you
understand and follow the instructions:
•

You can pick up or drop off passengers:
-

On single and double red lines

26

-

On single and double yellow lines

-

In places where loading is not allowed (shown by markings on the kerb)

-

In most parking bays

-

In most bus lanes, although you should avoid this if possible as it might delay
or obstruct buses

But remember you cannot wait for passengers in these areas.
•

You can stop in the above locations only long enough for the passengers to get in
or out of your vehicle. This includes the time to help passengers who need
assistance, for example wheelchair users, including the time needed to make sure
the wheelchair is in the right position and safely secured

•

You should not stop on taxi ranks, even when picking up or dropping off passengers

•

If there are waiting or parking restrictions, you cannot stop for longer than is needed
for the passenger to get in or out of the vehicle. (There is no general permission
that allows you to leave your vehicle to help a passenger to or from a building.
However, some councils understand and accept that this is an important part of
your job. If your passenger needs help, you should spend only a short time away
from your vehicle, if possible, and make a note of the passenger’s details/booking,
just in case you get a Penalty Charge Notice (PCN). It will be down to the council
who issued the PCN to decide whether to accept this evidence and cancel the PCN

•

If you are not picking up or dropping off a passenger, you may get a PCN if you wait
somewhere where there are restrictions. This can happen even if you have arrived
early for a booking or the passenger is late, or if a passenger has asked you to stop
and wait while they visit a shop or use a cashpoint

•

You should not leave your engine running while you are waiting. If your engine is
running while you are parked or waiting you are polluting the environment, and this
can be illegal on a public road

•

Never drop passengers off in the middle of the road, even if your vehicle is stopped
due to traffic. You should always get close to the kerb

Bus lanes and bus stops
You can pick up or drop off passengers in most bus lanes, even though you are not
allowed to drive in them, but you should avoid doing this if possible.
You must:
•

Enter and leave the bus lane in the most direct and safe way. Pay careful attention
to cyclists and motorcyclists who are able to use bus lanes and to pedestrians and
bus passengers that may be getting off the bus and crossing the road

27

•

Not stop at 'bus stop clearways' marked with a wide yellow line by the kerb. On red
routes, you cannot stop at bus stops marked with a wide red line by the kerb. You
should try not to stop at other red route bus stops to avoid delaying or obstructing
buses

•

Remember that only licensed taxis can use bus lanes – PHVs are not allowed to

You should avoid picking up or dropping off passengers at bus stops as this can delay
buses and may not be allowed at some bus stops.
Taxi ranks
Taxi ranks can only be used by licensed London taxis, not by PHVs. PHVs should not park
or wait on working taxi ranks at any time, nor pick up or drop off passengers on a taxi rank.
If you park or wait on a taxi rank you may be fined and TfL may also take licensing action
against you. This could include suspending or revoking your PHV driver’s licence.
Electric taxi charging points
Electric taxi charging points can only be used for charging electric taxis. They cannot be
used for charging PHVs.
If you park or wait on an electric taxi charging point, or use it to charge a PHV, you may be
fined and TfL may also take licensing action against you. This could include suspending or
revoking your PHV driver’s licence.
Penalty Charge Notices (PCNs)
PCNs can be given out by on-street parking attendants or enforcement officers or can be
sent to the registered keeper of the vehicle if the vehicle was caught on camera breaking
the law. You may get a PCN even if you do not see an enforcement officer, and the PCN
does not have to be attached to the windscreen of your vehicle to be valid.
You can get a PCN for parking offences or other moving traffic offences such as driving in
a bus lane, banned turns or movements (e.g. an illegal U-turn) or blocking a yellow box
junction.
Congestion Charging
PHVs entering the Congestion Charge zone need to pay the daily charge unless they have
an exemption. You can find information about the times and days when you need to pay
the Congestion Charge, and the area it covers on our website
If your PHV is designated 1 as wheelchair accessible, you will not have to pay the
Congestion Charge if you are entering the zone to carry out a booking from a London
1 Designated vehicles are those listed by TfL under section 167 of the Equality Act

28

licensed PHV operator. You can check if your vehicle has been designated as wheelchair
accessible on the TfL website.
Ultra Low Emission Zone
To help improve air quality, an Ultra Low Emission Zone (ULEZ) operates in London. You
can find information about the times and days when you need to pay the ULEZ charge,
and the area it covers on our website.
PHVs need to meet the ULEZ emissions standards or their drivers must pay a daily charge
to drive within the zone:
•

Petrol PHVs must be Euro 4

•

Diesel PHVs must be Euro 6

The emissions standard of a vehicle can usually be worked out from the date of its first
registration as new, which is shown on the vehicle's registration document known as the
V5C.
PHVs registered as wheelchair accessible by TfL are exempt from the ULEZ charge.
Red routes
These are the main roads in London and are marked with red lines by the kerb and, where
required, with signs. PHV drivers can pick up or drop off passengers on single or double
red lines, but PHV drivers must not wait for a passenger where restrictions apply, even if
they have arrived early for a booking or the passenger is late or wants to visit a shop.
The only exception is that we do allow PHVs to stop on the red route to wait for
passengers to use a cashpoint between the hours of 22:00 and 06:00 only but for no
longer than 5 minutes.
Please note that you must never, for any reason, stop within pedestrian clearways,
zig-zag line, bus stops with wide red lines, or any place where your vehicle would cause
an obstruction or any danger to other road users.
Some parts of red routes are marked for parking. Parking bays can be identified by a 'P' on
the signs that accompany them. The signs will tell you when parking is allowed, how long
vehicles can be parked and how soon a vehicle can stop again in the same section of
road.
It is important to pay attention to the signs and particularly the time limits and restrictions
shown on them. PHVs can pick up or drop off passengers and can park or wait in a
parking bay as long as they obey these limits.

29

Red route signs:

30

Section 7: Safer Driving
PHV drivers need to keep a careful watch on the roads at all times and be able to interact
safely with all other road users, especially those that are more vulnerable such as
pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists.
This section tells you about the how to maintain the highest standards of driving.
More advice on driving safely is on the TfL website.
Obey the law
As a PHV driver, you are expected to be fully aware of and to obey the rules of the road,
as explained in The Highway Code. You should avoid behaviour that causes any danger to
you, your passengers and other road users.
Most collisions in London are caused by a small number of easy-to-avoid behaviours.
These include speeding or driving too fast for the conditions, making dangerous
manoeuvres, getting distracted and not following the rules of the road.
You need to be aware of your responsibilities as a professional driver. Think about:
Safe speeds
Drive at a speed within the speed limit and one that is appropriate for the situation,
environment and weather conditions.
The faster you drive, the less time you have to do something to avoid a collision. The
resulting injuries also become more serious as speed increases.
Safe manoeuvres
Think about the manoeuvres you make, and make sure they are safe. This includes things
like looking carefully when pulling out of junctions, turning across traffic or passing cyclists
or motorcyclists.
Careless or dangerous driving is a serious offence with heavy penalties.
Concentration
You need to focus on the road and be able to react quickly. Don’t get distracted by mobile
phones and other electronic devices, music or passengers.
If you do need to answer or make a call you will need to stop safely, park your vehicle and
turn the engine off.
Distractions can make you less aware of what is happening on the road and affect your
judgement so your decision-making abilities are reduced.
31

Remember it is also illegal to use a hand-held phone or similar device when you are
driving unless you are calling the emergency services in an emergency and it is unsafe or
impractical to stop. This includes when you are stopped in a queue of traffic e.g. at traffic
lights, delays, etc.
Use of alcohol or drugs
You must never drive while you are under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
The police test for drug and alcohol use at the roadside to catch those who break the law.
Prescription medicine
If you are taking prescription medicine you must check with your doctor that it is safe for
you to drive.
Following traffic laws before a journey begins
You need to know about and follow the laws on the safe use of vehicles e.g. laws that
require you to have insurance, a current MOT certificate, a driving licence, wear a seatbelt
and not drive a faulty vehicle.
All drivers must make sure that their vehicle is maintained to the required standard.
It is important that you are aware of the rules regarding passengers wearing seatbelts in
PHVs.
All adults must wear a seat belt and drivers should encourage adult passengers to wear a
seatbelt for their own safety. Drivers must also make sure that all children are correctly
seated and restrained.
Drivers are responsible for making sure that all children under 14 years of age wear
seatbelts or sit in an approved child car seat.
If the correct child car seat is not available, children can travel without one - but only if they
travel on a rear seat:
•

And wear an adult seat belt if they are 3 or older

•

Without a seat belt if they are under 3

The police keep a close watch on London’s roads 24 hours a day and will identify drivers
who choose to break the law.
If you fail to obey any of the above rules, you may get a fixed penalty notice (FPN) or be
prosecuted – this can result in a fine and penalty points on your licence. It may also result
in you being banned from driving. You could also lose your PHV driver’s licence.
Being aware of other road users
TfL expects all professional drivers to be fully aware of other road users. In particular those
people who are the most vulnerable:

32

Pedestrians: Be aware of pedestrians suddenly stepping into the road and give way to
pedestrians on side roads.
Cyclists: Be aware of cyclists at all times but especially when you are turning, in slow
moving traffic or when you are pulling away from traffic lights. Make sure you give cyclists
enough room when you overtake them
Please ask your passengers to check before they open their door into the road to make
sure there isn’t a cyclist coming. You must do the same.
Motorcyclists: Be aware of motorcyclists at all times but especially when you are turning
or in slow moving traffic.
Windscreen vision
In clear sight
Annex 6 of the Highway Code, which deals with vehicle maintenance, says ‘windscreens
and windows must be kept clean and free from obstructions to vision’. That means you
should not put or fix anything onto your windscreen that will stop you being able to see the
road ahead. This includes mobile phones, sat navs and other devices that will reduce your
vision.
These pictures, based on photographs taken by the City of London Police, show just how
much your area of vision is reduced by having devices attached to your windscreen.

Be cradle careful
Before starting any journey, you should make sure you have a clear view through the
windscreen and windows of your vehicle and that no devices or signage reduce or obstruct
your view.
If you put a cradled device (such as a mobile phone or sat nav) on the area on your
windscreen that is covered by your windscreen wipers (known as the ‘swept area’), you
are committing an offence. If you are prosecuted, you may be fined and get penalty points
on your driving licence.

33

The swept are of a windscreen:

Driving conditions can change quickly and dangers such as pedestrians suddenly stepping
in front of you, or bikes coming out of side streets, mean you need to have a clear view of
the road. If your windscreen is covered in devices, you increase your chances of getting
distracted or not seeing dangers in time to avoid them. You must make sure that you put
any devices in positions that do not reduce how much you can see.
Other things to consider
Being tired: Tiredness can have a similar effect on a driver as drinking alcohol and can
result in death or serious injury. Plan your day to include regular breaks from driving and
do not begin a journey if you are already tired.
Weather conditions: You should change your driving behaviour when the weather
conditions change, so that you are always driving safely. If it suddenly starts to rain heavily
or there is thick fog, reduce your speed.
Driving at night: You should pay particular attention when driving at night because
pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists may be more difficult to see then.
Cycle safety
PHV drivers spend a lot of time on the roads and are almost twice as likely as private car
drivers to be involved in a collision that results in the death or serious injury of a cyclist.
Because of this, it is very important that you follow the advice below so you can reduce the
risk of a collision and help make sure that everyone travels safely.
Top tips
•

Always check for cyclists, pedestrians and motorcyclists who may be moving, even
if most vehicles are stopped in traffic

34

•

Look out for cyclists, especially when checking your mirrors before indicating to go
left or right, or changing your speed or direction

•

Check over your shoulder for cyclists and other road users before opening your
door to make sure it doesn’t swing out in front of them

•

Use your indicators when turning or changing lanes, even if you don’t think anyone
is near you

•

Indicate well in advance to allow others to react

•

Make sure your indicator is off once you have completed your manoeuvre, to avoid
confusing cyclists and other road users

•

Leave room for cyclists at traffic lights. Drivers should not enter the advanced stop
line box when the light is red. This space is for cyclists and you may be fined and
get points on your driving licence

•

Give cyclists room. Keep a safe distance from cyclists and don’t try to overtake
when there is not enough space. Give as much space as you would for another car.
If a cyclist is using the middle of the lane, wait patiently until you can pass safely

Vehicle safety
As a professional driver you are responsible for checking your vehicle is safe and legal to
drive.
Driver’s compartment
Check that:
•

Your seat and seatbelt are in good condition, are secure and you can adjust them
as you need

•

The steering wheel is secure and in good condition

35

•

The clutch and brake pedals have anti-slip covers

•

The handbrake is in good working condition

•

Driver warning lights do not light up when the engine is started

•

The indicators are working correctly

•

The horn works

•

The windscreen washers and wipers are in good condition

•

Any devices for opening and closing the driver and front passenger windows work
correctly

•

You can see in all the mirrors

Passenger compartment
This should be clean and all equipment in it must be in good working order.
This includes:
•

Seat belts fitted to all passenger seats

•

Upholstery, headlining, carpets and door trims

•

Passenger courtesy lights

•

Wheelchair safety belts/seat belts (if applicable)

•

All doors and door locking mechanisms

•

Vehicle heater system

•

No smoking signs

•

CCTV signage is displayed in a prominent position (this is only required where
CCTV is installed in the vehicle)

Wheels and tyres
Tyres must be the correct size, speed and weight rating for the make and model of your
vehicle. You should make sure all wheel nuts are in place and secure.
Tyres must be free from:
•

Cuts, lumps, bulges and tears

•

Excessive or uneven tyre wear
36

•

Excessive damage to the wheel rim

Tyre wear bar indicators are positioned around the tyre. If the tread pattern has worn down
to the level of the indicators, then you must replace the tyre.
Outside the vehicle
Make sure there are no signs of fluids (oil, brake fluid) leaking from under the vehicle on to
the ground.
You should check:
•

All external lights and reflectors are there and secure, undamaged and working

•

Body panels have not been badly repaired

•

There is no evidence of serious damage to the external body panels

•

There is no serious rusting or corrosion resulting in sharp edges

•

All windows are clean, undamaged and free from unapproved signage or
advertising material

37

Section 8: Being Aware of Equality and Disability
TfL is committed to improving transport in London by making it more accessible, safer and
reliable for all. Public transport plays an important role in opening up opportunities by
providing access to education, employment and other essential services. It helps people
stay in touch with family and friends and allows many people to live independently.
This section tells you about your responsibilities and how to provide the best service to all
your passengers.
Assisting passengers
TfL believes it is important to provide a public transport system which all people can use,
so that older and disabled people have the same opportunities to travel as all other people.
TfL expects PHV drivers to deliver a high standard of customer service to all passengers,
whatever their needs. However, we know that some passengers may need more help.
This section gives you information, advice and tips on what you can do to help disabled
passengers and other passengers that require assistance.
Here are some tips to help provide the best service to your passengers.
•

Always ask your passengers if they need any help and wait for your offer to be
accepted. Listen to any requests and remember that everyone is different

•

Be ready to give disabled and older passengers some help. This could be as simple
as writing things down for them, giving them a little extra time, facing them so they
can see your lips as you speak, or speaking loudly and clearly if they have
problems hearing you

•

Talk directly to the older or disabled person rather than to the person with them if
they are travelling with someone

•

If the passenger is vision-impaired and asks you to guide them to the vehicle, stand
by the person’s side and allow them to take hold of your arm/elbow so you can
guide the customer along. Do not take hold of the passenger and pull or push them
in a particular direction

•

Disabled or older passengers may need more time or help to get in and out of your
vehicle. For their safety, be patient and make sure they are comfortable and have
their seatbelt fastened before you start the journey

•

You can also help by asking the passengers if they have all their belongings with
them before you set off and when you arrive at their destination

•

Tell the passenger where they are going and let them know about any possible
dangers, such as pavement kerbs, doors opening towards or away from them and
slopes going up or down. This will help prevent accident and injury

38

•

During the journey, vision-impaired passengers in particular should be told about
any delays, or changes to the route. This is also a good thing to do with any elderly
passengers or passengers who have a learning disability, as they might get worried
or upset if there is a change to the route they expected to take

•

When you arrive at your destination, tell the passenger the location, then offer to
assist them out of the vehicle and to guide them to a safe place before leaving them

•

Clearly tell the passenger how much the fare is. When you give change to
passengers who are vision-impaired, it is important to count out the coins and notes
into their hand

•

Offer to help count out the change if a passenger seems to be having problems

•

Always have a pen and paper with you so that you can write things down. This can
help passengers who have a problem hearing or passengers who do not speak
much English

•

If you drive a designated wheelchair accessible vehicle, make sure the equipment is
in good working order and therefore available to use at any time

•

Be careful of where you pick up and drop off wheelchair users. Avoid places where
the pavement is on a slope

•

Not all disabilities are easy to see, so offer, or be prepared to help any passenger

Equality Act 2010
The following characteristics are protected under the Equality Act:
•

Age

•

Disability

•

Gender reassignment

•

Marriage and civil partnership

•

Race

•

Religion or belief

•

Sex

•

Sexual orientation

•

Pregnancy and maternity

It is illegal to treat anyone unfairly based on any of the characteristics listed above. It is
unacceptable for you as a PHV driver, or for any of your customers, to use language or

39

behave in a way that discriminates against any person. As a PHV driver you are expected
to treat all passengers in a professional and respectful way without making a judgement
about any person’s personal characteristics or assuming anything about them.
Designated wheelchair accessible PHVs
If you drive a designated wheelchair accessible PHV, you have certain duties under the
law. Your operator should be aware that the vehicle you are driving is a designated
wheelchair accessible vehicle.
If your vehicle is a designated wheelchair accessible PHV, you must:
•

Carry the passenger while they remain in the wheelchair and make sure the safety
belts are attached to the wheelchair to keep it in a safe position

•

Not charge extra because a passenger uses a wheelchair

•

Carry the wheelchair safely and securely if the passenger chooses to sit in a
passenger seat

•

Make sure the passenger is carried safely and in reasonable comfort

Offer the passenger any help that is reasonably required
Exemptions
A driver can only get permission to not carry wheelchairs for medical reasons. If a driver
cannot carry out the duties of section 165 of the Equality Act because the driver’s poor
health or fitness makes it impossible or unreasonable, an exemption certificate may be
given to the driver. You will need to contact TfL to apply for an exemption certificate and, if
granted, you will need to display an Exemption Notice in the windscreen of your vehicle.
Assistance dogs
Section 170 of the Equality Act says that PHV drivers must accept passengers with
assistance dogs and must allow the assistance dog to sit in the footwell, with the
passenger. PHV drivers and operators cannot refuse or charge a passenger extra
because they have an assistance dog.
Assistance dogs are highly trained ‘working’ animals so should not be treated like pets. Do
not stroke or feed assistance dogs or distract them in any way.
There is a wide range of assistance dogs. You can sometimes see what type of assistance
a dog provides by looking at the colour of the jacket it is wearing. Remember, though, that
an assistance dog may not always wear a jacket.

40

The pictures below are of some of the dogs you might come across. Please remember that
assistance dogs are not always the same breed as shown in the pictures and not all
assistance dogs have a jacket to identify them.

Dogs and Islamic law
In 2002, the Shariat Council confirmed that trained assistance dogs may accompany
disabled people in PHVs managed or driven by Muslims. The council’s guidance helps to
make religious law clear, and to prevent any possible conflict with secular law.
Exemptions
A PHV driver can only get an exemption from carrying assistance dogs for medical
reasons.

41

If a driver has a medical condition, such as asthma which gets worst when near dogs, or if
the driver is allergic or has a fear of dogs (a phobia), it may be possible for them to get an
exemption. You will need to contact TfL to apply for an exemption certificate and, if
granted, you will need to display an Exemption Notice in the windscreen of your vehicle.
Complaints
We will investigate any complaint we receive about a PHV driver breaking the Equality Act.
If there is enough evidence of an offence being committed and it is in the public interest to
do so, we will always prosecute the driver. If you are convicted of an offence under the
Equality Act we will decide how suitable you are to be a licensed PHV driver and we may
suspend or revoke your PHV driver’s licence.

42

Section 9: Safeguarding Children and Adults at Risk
Safeguarding means protecting children and adults at risk (sometimes called vulnerable
adults) from harm and abuse.
This section gives you information on how to keep your passengers safe.
Online safeguarding awareness training is also available. It is important that you take this
training.
Who is a child or an adult at risk?
According to the law, a child is a person under the age of 18. All children are vulnerable to
harm and abuse because of their age. Children are less able to protect themselves and
are dependent on adults. This makes them vulnerable to being exploited or abused.
An adult at risk is anyone over the age of 18 who is in need of extra care and support. An
adult may be at risk of harm or abuse because they are unable to protect themselves. This
might be because of their age, a disability or mental illness.
Carrying unaccompanied children in your vehicle
If your passenger is an unaccompanied child, make sure your operator knows, and that
you know the name of the adult who will be meeting the child at the end of the journey.
Your operator should give you that information.
Carrying children and adults at risk in your vehicle
As a driver, you may have to transport children or adults who are at risk. You may come
into contact with passengers that are being trafficked, exploited, abused or who are in
need of help in some other way.
Keeping children and adults at risk safe from harm and abuse is everybody’s
responsibility, not just social workers or the police. You can help with this and you should
know what to do if you have concerns that a person is at risk. You might notice things
which do not seem quite right, and you could be in a position to report something to the
police that may help protect someone at risk.
Make sure your behaviour with all passengers, including children and adults at risk, is
appropriate and professional at all times. Be aware of how your actions could affect others.
County lines
Criminal exploitation is also known as 'county lines'. This is when gangs and organised
crime groups use children and young adults to sell drugs. These children and young adults
are often forced to travel across counties for example, by train or in taxis and private hire

43

vehicles, and they use mobile phone ‘lines’ to keep in contact with individuals in the drugs
trade.
Signs that a child or vulnerable person is at risk may include:
•

Young or vulnerable people being picked up and taken to hotels or suspected
brothels particularly at odd times of the day and night

•

A young person travelling to meet someone they don’t know, perhaps who they
have met online

•

A young person or adult who shows signs of being abused, harmed or neglected

•

Adults putting a young person into your vehicle who may be under the influence of
alcohol or drugs

•

A child or young person who looks concerned or frightened in the company of
adults

•

An adult or young person who may be poorly dressed/unclean or look like they do
not get enough food

•

An adult who seems to be controlled by someone else or is having decisions made
for them by another adult

•

An adult who seems to have their money controlled by someone else

If you think you have seen a child or adult at risk who needs help or is suffering from any
signs of abuse or if they have told you directly, you must report it to your operator and the
police.
It is helpful to keep a note (written or recorded) of the incident or situation that you are
worried about. Include details such as dates and times, a description of what happened,
the name, address and a physical description of the people involved. You can then give
these details to the police.
As a driver it is important to:
•

Be aware of children and adults at risk

•

Be concerned about their well being

•

Listen to what they tell you

•

Reassure them by being professional, kind and considerate

•

Report concerns to your PHV operator or the police using 101. In an emergency,
call 999

44

Other support
In most situations you should report any incidents or concerns to your PHV
operator/controller and the police by calling 101. If it is an emergency call 999.
These are some other options if you do not feel it is appropriate to report the matter to the
police:
•

Crimestoppers (an anonymous service) - 0800 555 111

•

National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) - 0808 800 5000

•

Modern Slavery Helpline - 08000 121 700

You do not need to give your details and can report anonymously but the more information
you can give the better.

45

Section 10: Ridesharing
Ridesharing is when people who do not know each other pay separate fares and travel
together in the same vehicle.
All ridesharing journeys must be booked with a licensed London PHV operator. As a
London PHV driver, you can only carry out ridesharing bookings that you have received
from a licensed London PHV operator.
If you work for a PHV operator who offers ridesharing services you should talk to them
about ridesharing training for PHV drivers, as the operator should provide this.
Ridesharing can potentially introduce some safety risks for passengers.
It is possible that ridesharing might happen if, for example, two people have a similar route
to and from work and travel at similar times. They may choose to book a ridesharing PHV
and travel with someone they don’t know. In cases like this, one passenger could be put at
risk if the other passenger learns things about them such as their home address, where
they work, their daily routines and whether they live alone or not. A stranger knowing
information like this may make a passenger vulnerable to crime.
Another possible problem is that a passenger may book a ride-sharing journey by mistake.
If you stop to collect a second passenger and the first passenger was not expecting you to,
it could result in an argument.
To try to reduce these problems, it is always a good idea to:
•

Confirm with each separate passenger that they have booked a ride-share as soon
as you pick them up

•

Explain how many other people you will pick up and the predicted route

•

Let them know if you have to change the predicted route or pick up new passengers
during the journey

•

Tell the passenger how long it is likely to take to get to their destination

•

Make sure the passenger knows what the cost is likely to be

It may also be a good idea to say to passengers that if they feel uncomfortable at any
point, they can ask to get out of the vehicle and they can arrange for a non-rideshare PHV
vehicle to meet them at a point along your route.
You should not share the personal details of one passenger with any other passenger.

46

Glossary
Allergic (adj) – to describe someone who has a bad physical reaction to something e.g.
I’m allergic to nuts and cat fur.
Anonymous (adj) – not giving name or any personal details e.g. an anonymous letter is a
letter than does not have the sender’s name.
Approved child car seats (n) – these are chairs or seats especially designed for children
depending on their age and height that, along with a seat belt, keeps them safe while
travelling in a vehicle.
Assault (n) – a serious physical attack.
Assessment (n) – a test of knowledge, understanding, skills etc.
Assistance dog (n) – a dog that is specially trained to help a person with a disability e.g. a
blind person may have an assistance dog.
Asthma (n) – a medical condition that causes difficulty breathing.
Authorised Officer (n) – someone who works for TfL and makes sure that PHV drivers
are acting within the law and to TfL regulations.
Badge (n) – something with information on it (name, address and photograph) that you
wear to show who you are and what your job is.
Barred List (n) – a list of people who are not allowed to work with children or some adults.
This list is kept so that children and vulnerable adults can be protected from people who
are not suitable to work with them.
Braille (n) – a writing system used by people who are blind or vision-impaired. To read it
you use your fingertips to feel the bumps (called raised dots).
Brothel (n) – a place where people go to buy sex.
Byelaw (n) – a regulation made by a local authority.
Caution (n) – a formal warning given by the police to persons aged 18 or over who admit
to committing an offence.
Charge (v) – accuse of a crime e.g. The police charged him with dangerous driving.
Civil partnership (n) – a legal joining of two people with rights similar to a marriage.
Collision (n) – when a vehicle hits another vehicle, or object.
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages – a guide to describe the
ability and achievements of learners of foreign languages across Europe.
Comply (v) – to obey a request, rule or law.

47

Condition (n) – something that must happen or be agreed so that something else can
happen. For example, you might need to have an extra medical check when TfL issue you
your PHV driver’s licence.
Confidential (adj) – information that is meant to be kept secret or private.
Convict (v) – to decide that someone is guilty of a crime.
Conviction (n) – the decision of judge or court that someone is guilty of a crime e.g. He
had a conviction for speeding.
Corrosion (n) – the natural process where metal changes as it reacts with oxygen and
water in the environment. The main type of corrosion for cars is rust.
Council (n) – local government body.
Cradle (n) – something that you can use to hold a mobile phone or GPS device in place in
your vehicle so that you can use it hands free.
Crime reference number (n) – a number given to you by the police when you report a
crime.
Designated (adj) – to officially be given a particular role or job.
Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) – this is a public body that does checks on
people’s backgrounds. They look for past criminal convictions etc.
Discriminate (v) / discrimination (n) – to treat someone unfairly because of their sex,
race, religion, disability, etc.
Disqualified (adj) – to be prevented from doing something e.g. He got more than 12
points on his licence and was disqualified from driving.
Drop off (v) – to take something or someone somewhere e.g. The PHV driver reached the
destination and dropped off the customer.
DVLA (n) – the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency, an agency that is sponsored by the
government’s Department for Transport. It holds records on drivers and vehicles, issues
driving licences and taxes vehicles.
European Economic Area (EEA) (n) – this includes all countries in the European Union
as well as Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
Emissions standards (n) – standards for exhaust emissions of new vehicles sold in
the European Union and EEA member states.
Enforcement (n) – the process of making sure that rules are followed. Enforcement
Officers work for local councils.
Enhanced (adj) – at an increased or higher level e.g. a higher level of DBS check that
shows full details of criminal records, including cautions and warnings.

48

Excessive (adj) – too much, so that it becomes a problem e.g. excessive speed.
Exemption (n) / exemption notice –to get special permission to not have to do something
e.g. He got an exemption so he didn’t have to wear his PHV driver’s badge.
Expiry date (v) – when something runs out and is not valid any more e.g. date when the
PHV licence ends and has to be renewed.
Exploit (v) / exploitation (adj) – to use someone or something unfairly.
Fit and proper (phrase) – there is no fixed definition in law but it generally means to not
have a criminal record, and to be honest in your dealings with authority.
Fluid (n) – a liquid such as oil or water.
Fixed Penalty Notice (FPN) (n) – a punishment for a driving offence which usually
involves a fine and penalty points. It is given by the police on the spot or by post.
Gender reassignment (n) – the process of changing sex, from male to female or female
to male, often by using medical procedures such as surgery.
Give way (v) – to stop and allow other vehicles or pedestrians to go before you do.
Hate Crime (n) – when someone commits a crime against someone based on disability,
sex, sexual identity, sexual orientation, race, or religion.
Highway Code (n) – a set of rules, regulations, advice and guidelines for all road users in
the United Kingdom:
Inflammable (adj) – something that is easily set on fire and is therefore dangerous.
Information Commissioner’s CCTV Code of Practice – this describes the legal
requirements for using surveillance cameras (CCTV) in order to protect the user and the
people being watched.
Inspect (v) / inspection (n) – to test or check that something is working properly or that
rules are being followed.
Insurance policy (n) – an arrangement with an insurance company where you pay a
fixed amount of money (an insurance premium) and the company agree to pay you back
if something gets lost or damaged e.g. in a collision.
Issue (v) – to give or say something in an official way e.g. a PHV driver’s licence is issued
by TfL.
Junction (n) – a place where two or more roads meet.
Kerb (n) – a stone edging to a pavement or raised path.
Licence (n) - an official document that gives you permission to own, do, or use
something, usually after you have paid money and/or taken a test.

49

Licensed (adj) – approved to do something by an official organisation. For example,
approved by TfL to drive a PHV.
Licensee (n) – the person who receives the licence; the licence holder.
Licensing (n) – the process of giving licences.
Licensing authority (n) – a local government body responsible for licensing.
Loading (n) – the act of putting things into a vehicle.
Lone worker device (n) – a device that allows for communication with employers, or in
more serious situations, emergency services.
Manoeuvre (n) – a movement or action that needs skill and / or care to do. A three-point
turn or reverse parking are examples of driving manoeuvres.
Mental Health Order (n) – the arrangements for treatment of a person with serious mental
health problems.
MOT certificate (n) – a certificate that shows that a vehicle meets the minimum
environmental and road safety standards.
Obstruction (n) – a thing that stops traffic or slows it down e.g. A bus has broken down
and is causing an obstruction on the High Street.
Operator (n) – a company that does a particular type of business. For example, a
company that gives driving work to a PHV driver.
Parking bay (n) – a space in a car park or on the side of the road big enough for one car.
Pedestrian clearway (n) – a section of road where you are not allowed to drive or must
not block as pedestrians use the area.
Penalty Charge Notice (PCN) (n) – is a penalty, similar to a fine, for contravening road
rules such as parking, loading, bus lanes and yellow box junctions.
Penalty points (n) – these are added to your driving licence for offences like speeding.
Phobia (n) – a very strong fear of something.
PHV Authorised Vehicle Area – this is the special place at airports where PHV drivers
can wait to receive bookings from their operator.
Prosecute (v) – to start legal action against someone for a crime or other offence e.g. She
was prosecuted for dangerous driving and had to go to court.
Pulling away (v) – to drive off and increase speed from zero miles per hour, for example
from a parking bay or traffic lights.
Rank (n) – a special area where taxis (black cabs) wait for customers. At airports these
are known as authorised standings.

50

Reassure (v) – to say and do things to try to stop someone worrying.
Registered keeper (n) – the person on the DVLA’s records as the owner of a vehicle.
Replacement licence (n) – a new licence, when information on the licence needs to
change or the old licence has been lost.
Reprimand (n) – a formal telling off (v) – to show someone that you do not approve of
something, often in an official way.
Restriction (n) – a law or rule that controls or limits what you can do e.g. parking
restrictions that stop you parking in certain places.
Revoke (v) – to cancel something or take it away e.g. He was convicted of dangerous
driving and his PHV licence was revoked.
Running (v) – when a piece of equipment or an engine is on and working e.g. The engine
is still running – turn it off!
Rusting (n) – when metal changes colour and form because of the action of oxygen and
water. Holes can begin to appear in the metal.
Safety, equality and regulatory understanding assessment (n) – a test of your
knowledge of the information in this handbook. This test is required by TfL.
Secular (adj) – something that is not connected to religion e.g. secular law.
Self-employed (adj) – to work for yourself and be responsible for your own tax payments
etc.
Sexual Offences Order (n) – the arrangements by which a person who has committed a
sexual offence must live so that they are not a risk to the public or particular individuals.
Sexual orientation (n) – a person’s sexual identity in relation to who they are attracted to
emotionally or sexually. They may feel they are heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual.
Signage (n) – collection of signs, notices and stickers given by TfL to PHV drivers to
display in their vehicles.
Standard (n) – a level of quality that is acceptable e.g. PHV drivers must have a certain
standard of medical health and fitness to get a licence.
Suspend (v) – to stop for a short time e.g. There were so many complaints against him
that his PHV driver’s licence was suspended for three months. He could not work during
this time.
Taxi (n) – a London black cab
Topographical skills assessment (n) – a test of your ability to use a map to plot a route.
This test is required by TfL.

51

Trafficking (n) – dealing or trading in something illegal, for example, human trafficking is
the use of force to make someone a slave or do things against their will.
Tread (n) – this is the part of the tyre that makes contact with the ground and helps the
vehicle ‘stick’ to the road. The tread contains deep grooves and as these are worn down
the tyres become less effective and may become dangerous.
Tyre wear bar indicators (n) – these are small pieces of rubber in the grooves of the tyre
that help you to see if the type has worn down too far. The minimum legal tread depth on a
tyre is 1.6mm across the tread.
Unconscious (adj) – to be in a condition as if you are sleeping, often the result of an injury
to the head, or alcohol or drugs.
Vision-impaired (adj) – this is the decreased ability to see.
Vulnerable (adj) – at greater risk of physical or emotional harm e.g. children are
vulnerable to harm from criminal gangs.
Wheelchair accessible vehicle (n) – a vehicle which can carry wheelchairs.
Witness (n) – a person who sees an event, often a crime, as it happens and can give
information to the police.
Zig-zag lines (n) – a pattern of painted markings on the road surface either side of a
pedestrian crossing that show that no parking, waiting or overtaking is allowed.

52

