NEWYORK | Department of
greormNm- | Motor Vehicles

Go the extra mile, be an

GAN DONOR

New York State's need for organ and tissue donation is tremendous. Each year, thousands of New Yorkers
wait for a life-saving transplant. Just one person who donates their organs can save up
to eight lives.

What can you do to help?

Enroll in the NYS Donate Life Registry Online:
If you are 16 years of age or older, simply go to dmv.ny.gov and sign up to be an organ donor through
MyDMV, or go to donatelife.ny.gov.

Enroll By Mail:

If you prefer, enroll by signing the organ donation box on your driver license or non-driver identification
card application or on your renewal form. If it's not time for you to renew your license or non-driver ID,
simply go to donatelife.ny.gov to print and mail in your enrollment application or enroll online;
it's just that easy!

What You Should Know if You Enroll in the NYS Registry:

« Tell your family you have enrolled in the « There is no cost to the donor's family;
Registry and have given your legal « You can have your name removed from
consent for donation to occur upon your death; the Registry at any time;

« Your decision to donate will not affect your « After you enroll, you will receive a
medical treatment; confirmation email or letter to confirm

« The organs and tissues you donate will go your enrollment and provide you with
to the patients in the greatest need; additional information.

For more information call 1-866-NYDONOR (693-6667)
visit donatelife.ny.gov or contact one of these organizations:

Donate Life NYS: 518-326-3237 www.donatelifenys.org
Center for Donation & Transplant: 1-800-256-7811 www.cdtny.org (Capital District)
Finger Lakes Donor Recovery Network: 1-800-810-5494 www.donorrecovery.org (Finger Lakes Region)
LiveOnNY, Inc.: 1-800-443-8469 www.liveonny.org (Metro NYC and Long Island Area)
Connectlife: 1-800-227-4771 www.connectlife.org {Western NY/Buffalo}

®

[DONATE

LIFE
Yew rank State

4 | Driver's Manual

PART ONE - Information for Drivers and Vehicle Owners

6 Chapter 1- Driver Licenses
6 Types of Licenses
8 When You Apply for Your First License
n The Learner Permit and Road Test
15 Junior Operator Restrictions
17 Change of Address
17 License Renewal
18 Non-Resident and New Resident Drivers
19 Chapter 2 — How to Keep Your License
19 Special Rules for Drivers with Junior Permits & Licenses
19 Probation Period for All Other Newly Licensed Drivers
19 If You Receive a Traffic Ticket
20 Traffic Tickets Received Out of State
20 Mandatory Suspension or Revocation
pal The Point System
7) 22 Traffic Crashes
22 Fees and Civil Penalties
+ 23 Driver Responsibility Assessments
Zz 23 Driving While Suspended or Revoked
[11]
[i 24 Chapter 3 — Owning a Vehicle
24 Registration and Title
Zz 26 Registration Renewal
oO 27 Resident and Non-Resident Responsibility
27 Inspection
oO 28 Complaints Against Businesses
5 PART TWO — Rules of the Road
© 29 Chapter 4 - Traffic Control
[11] 29 Signs
_ 30 Traffic Signals )
31 Pavement Markings
om 33 Traffic Officers
< 34 Chapter 5 — Intersections and Turns
34 Right-of-Way
35 Emergency Vehicles
35 Blue, Green and Amber Lights
35 Turns
37 U-Turns
39 Chapter 6 — How to Pass
39 How to Pass on the Left
39 How to Pass on the Right
40 Being Passed
40 School Buses
42 Chapter 7 — Parallel Parking
a2 How to Park
a2 How to Park on a Hill
a2 How to Pull Out from Parallel Parking
a3 Parking Regulations
44 Reserved Parking for People with Disabilities

PART THREE - Safe Driving Tips

Chapter 8 — Defensive Driving

Be Prepared and Look Ahead

Driver Distractions

Aggressive Drivers

Road Rage

Speed

Allow Yourself Space

Seat Belts, Child Safety Seats, and Air Bags
How to Drive Safely in Work Zones
How to Drive Through a Roundabout
Drowsy and Fatigued Driving

Using a Cellular or Mobile Telephone
Vehicle Condition

Chapter 9 — Alcohol and Other Drugs
What Alcohol Does

Other Drugs

Alcohol, Other Drugs, and the Law
Your BAC

Chemical Tests

The Consequences

A Few Important Reminders

How to Avoid Trouble

Chapter 10 — Special Driving Conditions
Railroad Crossings

Expressway Driving

Night Driving

Driving in Rain, Fog, or Snow

How to Drive in Winter

How to Avoid Collisions With Deer
Driving Emergencies

Chapter 11 - Sharing the Road

Pedestrians and Skateboarders

Bicyclists

In-line Skaters, Skate Boarders and Non-Motorized Scooters
Motorcyclists

Moped Operators

Large Vehicles

Slow-Moving Vehicles

All-Terrain Vehicles and Snowmobiles

Horse Riders

Chapter 12 — If You Are in a Traffic Crash
At the Scene

Emergency First-Aid

Reports to DMV

DMV Consumer Directory

State DMV Offices

County DMV Offices

DMV Call Centers

Important DMV Addresses and Telephone Numbers

Driver’s Manual | 5

—
>
(oe)
-
m
Oo
Tn
(@)
Oo
pa
—
m
pa
—
wn

6 | Driver's Manual

APTER 1/DRIVER LICENSES

You must have a valid driver license to drive le-
gally in New York State. If you reside in and hold a
valid license from another state or nation, you can
drive legally in New York State. However, even if
you are licensed somewhere else, people under
age 16 cannot drive in New York State.

Drivers who have moved here must turn in their
out-of-state driver license and get a New York
license within 30 days of becoming a permanent
resident. In most cases, itis illegal to hold a New
York driver license and a driver license from an-
other state at the same time. It is also a violation
of Federal and state law to hold more than one
commercial driver license (CDL}.

Itis a crime to alter or forge any motor vehicle
document, including a driver license. This may
cause suspension or revocation of the driver
license and criminal prosecution resulting in a fine
or imprisonment.

TYPES OF LICENSES

New York State recognizes six types of
non-commercial driver licenses. The information
in this chapter applies to passenger car and mo-
torcycle licenses. Information about commercial
driver licenses {CDLs} can be found in the Com-
mercial Driver's Manual {CDL-10}). This is available
from the DMV website (search under Forms} or at
any motor vehicle office. You must have a CDL if
you drive any vehicle that:

« Has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of more than 26,000 pounds
(11,794 kg}; or

« Has a gross combination weight rating
{(GCWRY} of more than 26,000 pounds
{11,794 kg), including any towed unit with a
GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds (4,536
kg); or,

INFORMATION FOR DRIVERS
& VEHICLE OWNERS

« Is made or used to carry 15 or more
persons, in addition to the driver; or,

+ Regardless of seating capacity, is defined
as a bus by Article 19-A of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law {including vehicles that carry
school children or disabled people}; or,

« Carries hazardous materials required by
federal law to contain a placard.

The non-commercial driver licenses in this
manual are:

Operator, Class D - Minimum age is 18, or age
17 with a driver education Certificate of Comple-
tion (see Driver Education later in this chapter).
Allows you to drive a vehicle with a manufactur-
er's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 26,000
pounds (11,794 kg} or less; to tow a vehicle with a
GVWR of 10,000 pounds {4,536 kg} or less; or tow
a vehicle of more than 10,000 pounds if the gross
combination weight rating (GCWRY) of the two
vehicles together is no more than 26,000 pounds
{1,794 kg). You can also operate Class B and C
mopeds with this driver license.

Junior Operator, Class DJ - Minimum age is
16. Allows you to drive a vehicle with a GVWR
of 10,000 pounds (4,536 kg} or less, and tow a
vehicle of 3,000 pounds (1,361 kg} or less. You can
also operate Class B and C mopeds with this driv-
er license. Please note you are limited with where,
when, and with whom you can drive — please
refer to the section of this manual labelled “Junior
Operator Restrictions” found later in this chapter.

Non-CDL Class C - Minimum age is 18. Allows
you to drive some vehicles with a GVWR of
26,000 pounds or less, or to tow a vehicle with
a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less providing the
GCWR is not more than 26,000 pounds {11,794 kg}
where no CDL endorsement is required.

Taxi/Livery, Class E - Minimum age is 18.
Allows you to drive the same vehicles as a Class
D license, and transport passengers for hire in a
vehicle designed or used to carry 14 or fewer pas-
sengers. If the vehicle is defined as a bus under
Article 19-A of the Vehicle and Traffic Law (e.g., a
school car or a van that transports physically or
mentally disabled persons}, regardless of seating
capacity, you must have a CDL.

Motorcycle, Class M - Minimum age is 18, or
age 17 with a driver education Certificate of Com-
pletion {see Driver Education later in this chapter).
Allows you to drive motorcycles and mopeds.

Junior Motorcycle, Class MJ - Minimum age is
16. Allows you to drive motorcycles and mopeds.
You are also limited with where, when, and with
whom you can drive — please refer to the section
of this manual labelled “Junior Operator Restric-
tions” found later in this chapter.

Note: If you have a motorcycle license and
another type of driver license, both classes will
be listed on one document {e.g., “Class DM"}.

Enhanced Driver License - Can be used for
land and sea border crossings to and from the
U.S., Canada, Mexico, Bermuda and the Caribbe-
an. This license can be used instead of a passport
as an identity and Citizenship document at these
crossings and for air travel within the U.S. This is
an option for NYS residents who are U.S. citizens.
Commercial driver licenses and motorcycle licens-
es can also be issued as an EDL.

REAL ID License — The REAL ID Act is a federal
law passed by Congress resulting from the 9/11
Commission’s recommendation that establishes
specific federal requirements for state-issued
driver licenses, permits and ID cards to be accept-
able for certain federal purposes. Soon, every air
traveler flying within the United States will need to
present a REAL ID or an Enhanced Driver License,
or bring another acceptable form of identification,
determined by the federal government, to get
through security at U.S. airports. To get a REAL
ID, you will need to go to a DMV Office. For more
information, visit dmwv.ny.gov.

Driver's Manual | 7

Personal Use Vehicle (Rental, Recreational
Vehicle) or “R” endorsement - The Personal Use
Vehicle “R” endorsement is required for opera-
tion of recreational and/or rental vehicles used
to transport personal household goods when the
vehicle is over 26,000 pounds (11,794 kg.) GVWR
and/or forty (40) feet in length. This endorsement
is available to Class D and E license drivers.

To get an “R” endorsement: Submit a complet-
ed Application for Driver License or ID Card (MV-
44} to a state or county motor vehicle office; pay
a permit fee, which is valid for a maximum of two
road tests; and pass a road test in the size and
type of vehicle you will drive. No written test is re-
quired. For the road test, a driver who is at least 21
years old, with a license valid for the vehicle you
will drive during the test, must accompany you.
{e.g., a driver license with an “R” endorsement
or the correct Commercial Driver License}. The
road test will take approximately 15 minutes and
will include turns, intersections and backing the
vehicle to the curb. When you pass the road test,
you must go to a motor vehicle office and pay
the required fee to complete the license
amendment process.
8 | Driver's Manual

WHEN YOU APPLY FOR YOUR FIRST
LICENSE

The information and required application forms
you need to apply for a learner permit or driver
license are available at any motor vehicle office.
You can also download them from the DMV
website. To apply for a learner permit or driver
license you must complete an Application for
Driver License {(MV-44). You must pass a vision
and knowledge test and pay the application and
license fees. Most drivers must also complete an
approved 5-hour Pre-Licensing Course and pass
a road test. For more information about how to ap-
ply for and receive a license to drive a motorcycle
or a commercial vehicle that requires a CDL, refer
to the Motorcycle Operator's Manual {(MV-21MC}
or the Commercial Driver's Manual (CDL-10}.

You must bring your completed application to
any motor vehicle office, show the required proof
of name and date of birth, provide your Social
Security card and pay the correct fee.

Your first New York driver license will be issued
for a period not to exceed 5 years, on your month
and day of birth. Your fee for a learner permit and
license in Class D, DJ, M or MJ will be based on
your age and date of birth.

Proof of Identity and Age

For your protection, DMV must be sure who
you are. As part of the application, you must pro-
vide your Social Security card. You must present
documents that prove your name and age. All
proofs must be in English or accompanied by a
certified English translation. The list of acceptable
documents and assigned point values, described
below, are on form How to apply for a New York
Learner Permit, Driver License, or Non-Driver ID
Card (ID-44) available from the DMV
website (search under Forms} or at any
motor vehicle office.

Proof of Name

Documents that prove your name are assigned
a point value. You must present proofs that total
six points or more. At least one of the proofs must
have your signature.

Examples of common proofs and their point val-
ues are listed below.

Each document below has a value of 6 points:

« New York Photo Driver License/Permit/
Non-Driver ID Card {Must be current or not
expired for more than 2 years.)

Each document below has a value of 4 points:

« DMV Statement of Identity and/or Resi-
dence by Parent/Guardian (MV-45}
{If under 21. See special instructions and
requirements on the DMV form}. Proof of
date of birth and an original Social Security
card are required for the applicant.

« DMV Statement of Identity and/or
Residence (MV-45A)} (For applicants
represented by Government or
Government Approved Facilities.}

+ DMV Statement of Identity (MV-45B}
{For applicants who can be considered
a disenfranchised, homeless youth;
not usable for an Enhanced or REAL ID
Document.)

« U.S. Passport or Passport Card (Must
be valid.}

« Foreign passport - in English and with a
U.S. Visa and valid I-94 or unexpired |-551
stamp or statement on visa. If the document
is not in English, a certified translation by
the embassy or consulate of the issuing
country is required. See the publication
Proofs of Identity {ID-44).

« Consular ID Document

« Foreign Driver License with Photo. Must be
current or expired no longer than 2 years.

« Photo Driver License/Permit/Non-Driver
ID Card issued by another U.S. state,
jurisdiction, territory or possession, or, a
Canadian province or territory {must be
current or expired no longer than 2 years.}
Each document below has a value of 3 points:
« Valid U.S. Re-entry Permit {1-327}
« Valid U.S. Refugee Travel Document {-571}

« Certificate of Citizenship or Certificate of
Naturalization (N-550, N-560, N-561, N-570}

« Unexpired Permanent Resident
Identification Card {INS |-551}

« Valid U.S. Employment Authorization Card
{INS |1-688B or |-766, with photo}

« U.S. Military Photo Identification Card
(issued to active, reserve, and retired
military personnel only}

+ NYS /Benefit/ Medicaid Card, with photo

« Border Crossing Card

Each document below has a value of 2 points:

« U.S. Military Dependent ID card

+ NYS DMV Non-Photo Interim License or
Computer Generated Learner Permit

« NYS Vehicle Certificate of Title
+ NYS Vehicle or Boat Registration Document
« U.S. Social Security Card

« U.S. High School Photo ID with Report Card
or Official Transcript

+ U.S. College Photo ID with Official
Transcript

+ U.S. Marriage or Divorce Record issued by
a state or local government OR
Court-Issued Name Change Decree

« NYS Professional License

+ NYS or New York City Pistol Permit

« St. Regis Mohawk Tribal Photo ID Card

Driver’s Manual | 9

« Foreign Marriage or Divorce Record issued by
a government entity OR Court-Issued Name
Change Decree*

+ NYS Benefit/Medicaid Card WITHOUT Photo

« Foreign School Report Card/Record with
Photo*

«+ Expired Permanent Resident Card {expired
no longer than 2 years)

« Expired U.S. Employment Authorization Card
{INS |1-688B or |-766, with photo} (expired
no longer than 2 years)
Each document below has a value of 1 point:

« Valid U.S. Major Credit Card, or

« U.S. Cash {ATM} Card {with pre-printed name
and signature}, or

+ U.S. Canceled Check {with your pre-printed
name}, or

« U.S. Bank/Financial Institution Statement/
Record

« U.S. Employee Identification Card

+ U.S. Computerized Pay Stub {must include
your name}

« U.S. Supermarket Check Cashing Card {must
have your pre-printed name and signature}

« U.S. Life Insurance Policy (in effect at least
two years}

+ U.S. Health Insurance Card/Prescription Card
to show current proof of health insurance
coverage

« U.S. Utility Bill {must have your name and
address)

« U.S. High School Diploma or General
Equivalency Diploma (GED}

« Federal or New York State W-2 Form {must
include Social Security Number}
10 | Driver's Manual

«U.S. Union Card
« Veteran Universal Access Photo ID Card

+ U.S. Court Document with the applicant
named as a party*

« Foreign School Report Card/Record
WITHOUT Photo*

« U.S. Municipal ID Card with Photo

« IRS Tax Transcript or Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number Issuance Letter*

« Annual Social Security Statement (SSA-1099)
Proof of Age

You must prove your date of birth. The DMV will
accept the original or certified copy of ANY ONE
of these documents from the issuing agency:

« Birth Certificate issued and certified by the
U.S. Department of State or a Board of Health
or Bureau of Vital Statistics in the U.S, its terri-
tories or possessions

« Certificate of Birth Registration issued by the
Department of Health of New York State or
New York City

« U.S. Military Photo Identification Card

«U.S. Passport

« Foreign Passport {with INS documentation} or
Immigration Documents - See the publication

Proofs of Identity {ID-44} for details

« Certification of Citizenship or Certificate of
Naturalization

Vision and Knowledge Tests

To pass the vision test, you must have 20/40
vision in at least one eye with or without correc-
tive lenses. If you cannot pass this test or if you
wear special lenses, contact a DMV Call Center
for additional instruction.

The written test for a Class D, M, DJ, MJ or E

license examines knowledge of the rules of the
road, safe driving techniques, road signs and the
laws about alcohol and drug use while driving. To
pass the written test, you must correctly answer at
least 14 of the 20 questions asked, but you must
correctly answer two of the four questions about
road signs. You can practice for the written test
with the questions included in this Driver's Manual
and you can take practice quizzes online at the
DMV website. (dmv.ny.gov}

If you require a motorcycle license, also study
the Motorcycle Operator's Manual (MV-21MC}).
There is a separate commercial driver license
written test for a CDL Class A, B, or C. If you want
to apply for a commercial driver license, also
study the Commercial Driver Manual {CDL-10}.

Automated Knowledge Test

Class D knowledge tests are offered in multiple
languages and can be taken via touch screen test
stations or on paper. For practice tests, please
visit our website by scanning the QR code below.
The QR code can be scanned with your smart-
phone once you've downloaded a free QR Code
Reader to your phone.

Online Knowledge Test Application

Before you apply for a learner permit, students
who are at least age 15 and 11 months can take
the written test through the DMV Online Knowl-
edge Test Application (OKTA} program. The test
is given at participating high schools across New
York State. The test is given in an easy-to-use
format and is offered in English and Spanish.

It is not necessary for schools that participate
to have a driver education program. They must
provide a personal computer with Internet access,
a printer and at least one staff person to monitor
the tests. The OKTA program automatically scores
each test and displays the results for the student
on the computer screen.

Students who pass the test online will receive
Driver's Manual | 11

a receipt, instructions and all required forms to
apply for a learner permit. Students who are at
least age 16 can bring their receipt and completed
forms to any state or county motor vehicle office
to apply for a learner permit. Students who fail the
test can take it again online as many times as the
school allows.

THE LEARNER PERMIT AND ROAD TEST

The Learner Permit

When you pass the vision and written tests and
pay your fees, your learner permit will be issued
and you can start to learn to drive. When you
practice, you must be supervised by a licensed
driver who is at least 21 years old, has a license
valid for the type of vehicle you are driving, and
is seated in the front seat with you when you
are driving. New York State also has additional
restrictions that apply to drivers under the age of
18. Based on the Graduated Driver Licensing laws,
if you have a DJ Learner Permit you are restricted
by where and when you drive, and who can be in
the car with you when you drive. These restric-
tions are based on where you are driving and are
best explained by the chart on the next page:

The restrictions for drivers with learner permits
are also available at state or county motor vehicle
offices or online, “Important Information About
Learners’ Permits” (MV-500H}, at the DMV
website, dmv.ny.gov/forms/mv500h.pdf.

Driver's Manual | 12

REGIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR A JUNIOR PERMIT

New York City (5 Boroughs)

5AM — 9PM

You must drive only under the
immediate supervision of your:

. Parent

. Guardian

. Person “in loco parentis™
. Driver Education Teacher
. Driving School Instructor

Those listed above must be age
21 or older and have a license
valid for the vehicle being driven.

Vehicle must have dual controls
(dual brakes)

9PM —- 5AM

Long Island (Nassau & Suffolk)

5AM — 9PM

You must drive only under the

immediate supervision of your:

1. Parent

2. Guardian

3. Person “in loco parentis™

4. Driver Education Teacher

5. Driving School Instructor;
or

6. Anyone who has been desig-
nated in writing by the parent,
guardian, or person “in loco
parentis™.

Those listed above must be age

21 or older and have a license
valid for the vehicle being driven.

9PM —- 5AM

Upstate (All Other Counties)

5AM — 9PM

You must drive only under the
immediate supervision of:

A person who is age 21 or older
and has a license valid for the
vehicle being driven.

9PM —- 5AM

You must NOT drive.

Definitions (For the purpose of this section of
the manual)

“Properly Licensed” means has a license valid
in this state to drive the type of vehicle being
driven by the new or junior driver.

“Guardian” means a person who has, on a reg-
ular and extended basis, assumed the character
of a parent and discharges parental duties as the
result of a court appointment.

“In Loco Parentis” means a person who
assumes the role of a parent for the purpose of

You must NOT drive

You must drive only under the
immediate supervision of your:
1. Parent

2. Guardian

3. Person “in loco parentis™

4. Driver Education Teacher

5. Driving School Instructor

Those listed above must be age
21 or older and have a license
valid for the vehicle being driven.

performing parental duties with the implied or
actual consent of a parent (e.g. as a result of the
death, incapacity, or in the absence, of a parent).

“School Course” means instruction that is
licensed or approved by a state agency or depart-
ment, or training conducted by the U.S. Armed
Forces. The term “school course” does NOT
include activities or events for which no scholastic
credits are given.
13 | Driver's Manual

“Employment” means a place of business at
which you are paid to work on a scheduled basis.
You cannot drive during work or as part of your
work duties.

“Work Study Program” means a state-ap-
proved work-study program. For example, a
Board of Cooperative Educational Services
{BOCES} course for which academic credit is
granted for work experience.

“Medical Appointment” means medical treat-
ment that is necessary for you or a member of
your household.

“Daycare” applies to travel to and from child
care if the attendance of the child is necessary
for a family member to maintain employment or
attend a school course.

General Rules for All Drivers with Learner
Permits

If you hold a learner permit, you cannot drive:

« Unless you are accompanied by a super-
vising driver who is at least age 21 and has
a license to operate the vehicle you are
driving. In Long Island and New York City,
this person must be a parent, guardian or
driving instructor. For example, a person
with a motorcycle license can supervise a
motorcycle learner.

«Ina DMV road test area.

« On any street within a park in New York City
or any bridge or tunnel under the jurisdic-
tion of the Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority.

+ On the Cross County, Hutchinson River,
Saw Mill River, or Taconic State parkways in
Westchester County.

Driving with a Junior Learner Permit

« You cannot drive with more than one
passenger under the age of 21 unless they
are members of your immediate family or
if your supervising driver is your parent,
guardian, person “in loco parentis,”
driver education teacher or driving
school instructor.

« You and each passenger must wear a seat
belt: one per person. Every child passenger
must use a correct child restraint. (See:
Chapter 8, “Seat Belts, Child Safety Seats,
and Air Bags”)

« If you hold a junior permit, the only pas-
senger allowed in the front seat is your
supervising driver.

«+ Also see “Special Rules for Drivers with
Junior Permits and Licenses,” Chapter 2.

Preparing for the Road Test

Safe drivers often find their amount of practice
before the road test makes a positive difference.
Before you take the test, it is important that you
have had at least 50 hours of practice, with at
least 15 hours after sunset. It is recommended
that at least 10 hours of the supervised practice
be in moderate to heavy traffic. Road tests are
given on city streets, but you should practice
on expressways and other types of highways as
well. DMV suggests you take a high school or
college driver education course or lessons from a
DMV-licensed driving school. If you cannot take a
course or lessons, have the person who teaches
you read Parts 2 and 3 of this manual.

You cannot practice in a DMV road test area
or on any restricted roads. In New York City,
these areas include any street within a park and
all bridges and tunnels under the jurisdiction of
the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. In
Westchester County, the streets and roadways
you cannot practice on include these parkways:
Cross County, Hutchinson River, Saw Mill River
and Taconic State.

Safe Driving Course Requirement

Before you can make a road test appointment,
you must first complete an approved safe driver
course. This requirement is automatically fulfilled
as part of every high school or college driver
education course. Or you can complete this re-
quirement when you take a special Pre-Licensing
course available at most licensed driving schools.
For motorists 18 years of age or older a pilot
Online Pre-Licensing Course is now available.
{See https://dmv.ny.gov/driver-license/prepare-
your-road-test} When you complete the safe driv-
ing course in person, you will receive a certificate
to show when you make your road test appoint-
ment. The certificate is valid for one year.

Note: The DMV-certified Point & Insurance
Reduction Program (a.k.a. Accident
Prevention Course or Defensive Driving
Course} does NOT meet the Safe Driving
course requirement.

Driver Education

If you are 17, you are eligible for a senior driver
license (Class D or M} if you have a junior driver
license and have completed a state-approved
high school or college driver education course.
To change your junior license to a senior license,
bring your junior license and the Student Certif-
icate of Completion (MV-285} that you received
from your instructor to any motor vehicle office.
You must return your certificate and junior license
to receive the senior license. If you do not change
your junior license to a senior license, you are
subject to the restrictions for junior drivers until
you are age 18, even if you carry the completion
certificate with you. You can also give your certifi-
cate with your junior permit to the license examin-
er at your road test. You will automatically receive
a senior license when you become eligible.

For Junior Drivers with Permits

Your permit must be held, in valid status for a
minimum of six months in order to take the road
test. When you pass the road test, you will be
issued a Junior License (Class DJ or MJ}. See
“Regional Restrictions for a Junior License.”

A DMV motor vehicle license examiner will
conduct the road test. You must give the license
examiner your photo learner permit, your 5-hour
pre-licensing course completion certificate
{MV-278} or your Student Certificate of Comple-
tion (MV-285} and a completed Certification of
Supervised Driving {(MV-262}. All junior drivers
with permits are required to present a completed
MV-262 at the time of the road test.

The Certification of Supervised Driving (MV-
262} is available from the DMV website dmv.

Driver's Manual | 14

ny.gov and at any motor vehicle office. With this
statement, your parent or guardian certifies that
you completed at least 50 hours of practice driv-
ing, including at least 15 hours after sunset, with
an appropriate supervising driver

{See chart “Regional Restrictions for a Junior
Permit” later in this chapter).

You must bring a vehicle to drive during the
road test. The vehicle must be correctly regis-
tered, inspected, insured and equipped, and in
good working order. This includes doors and
seat belts. The passenger side seat belt must be
available and clean for use by the examiner. If you
drive to the road test site, you must also bring a
supervising driver who is at least 21 and holds a
license valid for the vehicle you will drive during
the road test. Motorcycle applicants must bring a
car or truck and a licensed driver to transport the
license examiner during the test.

For All Other Drivers with Permits

When you take your road test, you must give
the license examiner your photo learner permit,
your 5-hour pre-licensing course completion
certificate (MV-278} or your Student Certificate of
Completion {(MV-285). As described for “Junior
Drivers with Permits,” you must also provide a
vehicle to drive during the road test and a correct-
ly licensed driver.

The Road Test

After you have completed the Safe Driving
Course Requirement, and you feel you are ready
for your road test, you can schedule your road
test appointment using the Road Test Scheduling
System online or by telephone at 1-518-402-
2100. If you took your Pre-Licensing Course in
person, you must have your Pre-Licensing Course
Completion Certificate (MV-278} or driver edu-
cation course Student Certificate of Completion
{MV-285} before you schedule your appointment.
When scheduling your appointment, you will need
to have your Learner Permit and Safe Driving
Course certificate (MV-278 or MV-285} with you.
156 | Driver's Manual

The DMV can cancel road tests because of bad
weather. Check the website for any cancellation
information.

After the Road Test

At the conclusion of the road test, the Examiner
will give you instructions on how to receive your
test results. An interim license that allows you to
drive will be available to you online. Keep your
interim license with your photo learner permit
until you receive your photo driver license. You
will receive your photo driver license in the mail,
in about 2 weeks.

When you qualify for a license, you must
continue to be careful and obey the traffic laws to
gain experience as a capable driver. Many motor-
ists enroll in a DMV-certified Accident Prevention
Course to help them gain knowledge of safe
driving practices and important highway safety
issues. This course, commonly known as the Point
and Insurance Reduction Program (PIRP), is avail-
able through private companies or corporations in
New York State.

The course is available as a classroom course
or online {called I-PIRP} and reviews time-tested
safe driving tips and provides a summary of the
vehicle and traffic laws. If you are eligible for
point reduction, as many as four {4} points can be
reduced from your driving record. {For more infor-
mation on the point system, see The Point System
in Chapter 2.} You can complete this course every
18 months for the purpose of point reduction. You
can also qualify for a minimum 10% reduction in
the base rate of liability and collision insurance
premiums for three years. More information
regarding the Point and Insurance Reduction
Program, including lists of sponsors approved to
provide this course, is available on DMV’s website
at https://dmv.ny.gov/learn-more-about/pirp.

JUNIOR OPERATOR RESTRICTIONS

Driving with a Junior License

« You cannot drive with more than one pas-
senger under the age of 21 unless they are
members of your immediate family.

« You and each passenger must wear a seat
belt: one per person. Every child passenger
must use a correct child restraint. (See:
Chapter 8, “Seat Belts, Child Safety Seats,
and Air Bags”)

«+ Also see “Special Rules for Drivers with
Junior Permits and Licenses,” Chapter 2.

New York State also has additional restrictions
that apply to drivers under the age of 18. Based
on the Graduated Driver Licensing laws, if you
have a Class DJ Driver License {also known as
a Junior Operator License) you are restricted to
where and when and who can be in the car with
you when you drive. These restrictions are based
on where you are driving and are best explained
by the chart on the next page:
Driver's Manual | 16

REGIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR A JUNIOR LICENSE

Upstate (All Other Counties)

New York City (5 Boroughs)
5AM — SPM

You must NOT drive.

SPM — 5AM

You must NOT drive.

Long Island (Nassau & Suffolk)
5AM — SPM

You may drive alone only directly
between your home and employ-
ment, a work-study program, a

course at a college, university, or
registered evening high school, a
driver education course, or while
engaged in farm employment.

You may drive when accompa-
nied by your licensed parent,
guardian, person “in loco paren-
tis”, driver education teacher, or
driving school instructor.

SPM — 5AM

You may drive alone only directly
between your home and a work-
study program, a course at a
college, university, or registered

5AM — 9PM

You may drive without being
accompanied.

SPM — 5AM

You may drive alone only directly
between your home and employ-
ment or a school course.

evening high school, a driver
education course, or while
engaged in farm employment.

Driving Alone with a Junior License
Please see this important information:

If you hold a Junior License and drive in the coun-
ties of Nassau or Suffolk:

You can drive by yourself between home and
your employment, which can include farm work, if
you carry the correct proof of employment. Your
employer can complete a Certificate of Employ-
ment {(MV-58A}, available from the DMV website
{search under Forms} or at local motor vehicle
offices. In the upstate counties only, instead of an
employment certificate, you can carry a letter from
your employer. The letter must be marked with
a date and signed by your employer, and must
show the business name, address and telephone
number where you work.

All other driving must be accom-
panied by your licensed parent,
guardian, or person “in loco
parentis™.

It also must list your name, date of birth, driver
license number, job description, and days, hours
and location of employment. The address and
telephone number at which the employer can be
contacted must be included for verification by a
magistrate or police officer.

When you drive by yourself between your
home and a qualified school course or approved
work-study program, you must carry proof of en-
rollment. This must be a letter, marked with a date
and signed by an appropriate school or program
official, on the school or program letterhead. It
must include the address and telephone number
of the official for verification by a magistrate or
police officer. The letter also must include the
date(s}, hour(s} and location(s} of the school
course or program activity, your name, date of
birth, and driver license number.
17 | Driver's Manual

Motorcyclists and Moped Operators

The restrictions in this manual also apply to
operating a motorcycle or moped. Your learner
permit or junior license {Class M or MJ} does not
allow you to carry any passenger except your
supervising driver. Your supervising driver must
have a driver license valid to operate the same
class motorcycle or moped you are driving, and
must exercise general supervision and control by
remaining within one-quarter mile. It is strongly
recommended that your supervising driver be
able to see you at all times.

NYS Drivers Visiting Other States

You can drive outside New York State with
your learner permit, junior learner permit or junior
license if it is allowed by the laws of the other
state. You must obey that state's permit, junior
permit and driver license restrictions that may
apply. Ask the police or motor vehicle authorities
in the state you are visiting.

CHANGE OF ADDRESS

If you change your address you must notify
DMV within 10 days by mail, on a Change-of-Ad-
dress Form (MV-232}, or online at the DMV web-
site dmv.ny.gov. You must write the new address
in the space provided on the back of your
driver license.

LICENSE RENEWAL

You are responsible to know when your
driver license expires and to renew it on time. If
the DMV has your current address, you should
receive a renewal notice and instructions in the
mail approximately 45 days before your license
expires. If you do not receive the notice, you can
apply for renewal at a motor vehicle office. You
can renew your license up to one year before its
printed expiration date.

Soon the federal government will require your
driver license, permit or ID card to be REAL ID
compliant if you wish to use it as identification to
board a domestic flight {within the U.S}, or enter
military bases and certain federal facilities. You
may also use an Enhanced driver license, permit,

or non-driver ID or valid U.S. Passport or other
identification acceptable to the federal govern-
ment. To get a REAL ID, you will needto goto a
DMV Office.

To get a Real ID you MUST bring to the office
the following original or certified proof documents:

« Proof of identity.

« Proof of Social Security Number or Social
Security Number ineligibility.

« Proof of your date of birth.

«+ Proof of U.S. citizenship, lawful permanent
residency or temporary lawful status in
the U.S.

« Two proofs of New York State residence
such as utility bill or mortgage statement
(P.O. Box not acceptable). This address will
be displayed on your card.

« The application process also requires the
DMV to take a new photo.

If you decide you do not want a REAL ID or
Enhanced document, your license most likely can
be renewed through the mail or through the DMV
website, but be advised that any license, permit
or ID card issued after October 30, 2017 will be
marked “Not for Federal Purposes”. If you renew
by mail or through the DMV website you must
prove you have passed an eye test within the past
six months or within one year as determined by a
licensed health care professional before the date
you renew your license. To renew by mail, you
must return to the DMV your renewal application
and a completed Eye Test Report (MV-619} which
documents that you passed the vision test. If you
renew through the DMV website dmv.ny.gov, you
will need information from a completed Eye Test
Report by your health care professional. An Eye
Test Report form is available from the DMV web-
site dmv.ny.gov {search under Forms} or at any
motor vehicle office. Make sure to renew early if
your license will expire while you are out of state.
If you cannot renew early or a serious illness
prevents you from doing so, contact a DMV
Call Center.

If you enter military service, your license can
be automatically extended throughout your active
service and for six months after discharge. You
must notify the department within 60 days of the
entry date into service. You must submit the form,
Notification of Military Service (MV-75}, available
from the DMV website {search under Forms} or at
any motor vehicle office.

NON-RESIDENT AND NEW RESIDENT
DRIVERS

If you are a resident of another state or country
and hold a valid driver license there, you can
legally drive in New York State. You should not
apply for a New York driver license unless you
become a resident of this state. Then, to remain
legally licensed, you must apply for a New York
driver license within 30 days after you establish
you are a New York State resident.

If you are a new resident with a valid driver
license issued by a U.S. state, territory or posses-
sion, or a Canadian province or territory, you must
turn in your out-of-state license to get a New York
driver license. You must show additional proof of
name and date of birth (see “Applying for your
First License”), and provide your Social Security
card. You must pass the vision test. If your out-
of-state license has been valid for less than six
months or had expired more than one year ago,
you must also pass the written and road tests and
complete the safe driving course.

If you are a new resident licensed in a country
other than Canada, you must pass the vision
test, complete the safe driving course, turn in
your foreign license, and you must pass a written
and road test. When you pass the road test, you
must give your foreign license to the DMV motor
vehicle license examiner who conducted the
test. Your foreign driver license will be destroyed
unless you provide the examiner a written request
to hold your foreign license on file at a New York
State Department of Motor Vehicles office. The
license examiner will tell you which DMV District
Office will hold your foreign license. Your foreign

Driver’s Manual | 18

license will be returned at your request, but only
after you return your New York license.

Drivers from Outside New York State

If you are under age 18 and hold a learner
permit, junior permit or junior driver license from
outside New York State, you must obey the
restrictions described in this publication as well as
the restrictions from your home state. Make sure
your permit or license is valid to drive outside
your home state before you operate a vehicle in
New York. If you are less than 16 years of age, you
cannot drive in New York State even if you have
an out-of-state license.

19 | Driver's Manual

If you commit a serious traffic violation or
several violations that are less serious, you can
lose your driving privilege through suspension or
revocation of your license.

“Suspension” means your license (or privilege
to drive} is taken away for a period of time before
itis returned. You may be required to pay a sus-
pension termination fee.

“Revocation” means your license {or privilege
to drive} is cancelled. To get a new license, you
must re-apply to the Department of Motor
Vehicles (DMV} once the revocation period is
over. You may be required to pay a license
re-application fee. Your application may be denied
if you have a poor driving record or refuse to
meet DMV requirements. Revocation periods
may be longer than the minimum periods listed in
this publication.

“Driving privilege” means the courtesy extend-
ed to out-of-state-drivers that allows them to drive
a motor vehicle in New York State. It also refers
to permission from New York State for a person
without a license to get a New York driver license.
A driving privilege can be suspended or revoked
for the same reasons as are New York driver
licenses. Driving with a suspended or revoked
privilege carries the same penalties as driving
with a suspended or revoked license.

SPECIAL RULES FOR DRIVERS WITH
JUNIOR PERMITS AND LICENSES

Every driver with a junior permit or driver
license could face sanctions and other penalties.
For example, your permit, license or privileges will
be suspended for 60 days if you are convicted of
a serious traffic violation {three points or more} or
two other violations.

Your junior permit, license or privileges will be
revoked for 60 days if you are convicted of a se-
rious violation {three points or more}, or two other
violations within the first six months after you
receive your license or privileges back following
suspension or revocation.

In addition, your junior permit, license or priv-
ileges will be suspended for 120 days when you
are convicted of a texting or cell phone violation.

A junior permit must be held for a minimum
of six months, excluding any time the permit is
suspended or revoked, before a road test can
be scheduled.

PROBATION PERIOD FOR ALL OTHER
NEWLY LICENSED DRIVERS

If you are 18 or older when you pass your road
test for a driver license, or obtain a license follow-
ing revocation, you will be on probation for
six months.

If you are convicted of DWAI {alcohol},
speeding, reckless driving, following too closely,
participating in a speed contest, or any two traffic
violations while on probation, your license will be
suspended for 60 days. Following the end of the
60-day suspension, a new six month probationary
period will begin. If you are found guilty of one of
the above violations or any two traffic violations
during this second probationary period, your
license will be revoked for at least six months. If
your license is restored following the revocation,
you will be on probation for another six months.

If you are convicted of a texting or cell phone

violation, your probationary license will be sus-
pended for 120 days.

IF YOU RECEIVE A TRAFFIC TICKET

If you receive a traffic ticket, do not delay —
follow the instructions on the ticket for the plea
you want to make. Your driver license will be
suspended indefinitely. If you do not respond that
you have received the ticket, you could be found
guilty by default conviction.

The DMV Traffic Violations Bureau (TVB} pro-
cesses the tickets for non-criminal moving traffic
violations issued in the five boroughs of New York
City. The TVB system allows the other courts in
these areas to concentrate on criminal cases. This
includes driving offenses like Driving While Intox-
icated (DWI) and driving while suspended or re-
voked. In other areas of the state, traffic violations
are processed in the criminal and traffic court of
the city, county, town or village where the alleged
offense occurred. No matter what court system

is involved, every motorist who receives a traffic
ticket can present a defense and be represented
by a lawyer.

TRAFFIC TICKETS RECEIVED
OUT OF STATE

The New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles does not record convictions of moving
traffic violations by NYS non-commercial licensed
drivers in other jurisdictions, except traffic offens-
es committed in the provinces of Ontario and
Quebec in Canada. Out-of-state traffic convic-
tions, except for Ontario and Quebec, are not
added to your New York State “violation point”
driving record.

However, your New York driver license will
be suspended if you fail to answer a ticket for a
moving traffic violation in any state except Alaska,
California, Michigan, Montana, Oregon, Virginia
or Wisconsin. Your license will remain suspended
until you answer the ticket. For clearance of your
NYS driver license or permit you must submit
proof to the NYS Department of Motor Vehicles
that the ticket has been satisfied. If you are a
driver from any state, except one of the six states
listed above, you will have your driver license
suspended in your own state if you fail to answer
a moving traffic violation summons in New York
State.

If you are over 21 years old and are convicted
of an alcohol- or drug-related driving violation
{e.g., DUI} in another state or the provinces of
Ontario and Quebec in Canada, your New York
driver license will be revoked for at least 90 days.
Out-of-state drivers who get tickets in New York
State can contact the motor vehicle department of
their own state or province about how a
conviction affects them.

Driver's Manual | 20

If you are under 21 years old and convicted of
any alcohol or drug-related violation that occurred
out of state, your New York driver license will be
revoked for at least one year. If you have any
alcohol conviction your license will be revoked for
at least one year or until the age of 21, whichever
is longer.

The New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles records the conviction of any New York
driver for criminal negligence, homicide, or assault
that arises from the operation of a motor vehicle
and which results in death. The driver license or
privilege to drive will be revoked and vehicle
registrations may also be revoked. It does not
matter if the conviction occurred in this state or
another state.

MANDATORY SUSPENSION
OR REVOCATION

Your driver license or driving privilege can be
suspended or revoked for many reasons. NOTE:
Motorboat and snowmobile operators less than 21
years old who drink alcohol face similar penalties
and sanctions against their privileges to operate a
motorboat or snowmobile. Examples of revoca-
tions and suspensions that are required by law:

Alcohol and Drug Violations (Also see
Chapter 9: Alcohol and Other Drugs)

« Aggravated driving while intoxicated (Agg-
DWI}, with 18 of one percent blood alcohol
content {18 BAC): minimum one-year
revocation.

« Driving while intoxicated {DWI}, with .08
of one percent blood alcohol content {.08
BAC}: minimum six-month revocation

« Driving while ability impaired by alcohol
{DWAI): 90-day suspension.

« Driving while ability impaired by drugs
{DWAI-drug}): minimum six-month revocation

« Driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs out-of-state (DUI): minimum 90-day
to six-month revocation, depending
on conviction.
21 | Driver's Manual

Chemical Test Refusals (Also see Chapter 9:
Alcohol and Other Drugs)

« Chemical test refusal, drivers over age 21:
minimum one-year revocation

« Chemical test refusal, drivers over age 21,
within five years of a prior refusal revocation
or any alcohol or drug-related violation:
minimum 18-month revocation

« Chemical test refusal, drivers under age 21,
first time: minimum one-year revocation

« Chemical test refusal, drivers under age 21,
second time: Minimum revocation until age
21 or one year, whichever is longer

« Zero Tolerance test refusal: Minimum
one-year revocation

Drivers Under Age 21

If you are under age 21 when arrested,
conviction for any of the alcohol or drug-related
violations listed above will result in a minimum
one-year revocation. A second violation while
under age 21 requires a revocation for one year
or until you reach age 21, whichever is longer.
These penalties apply to youthful offenders, or if
you were arrested or convicted out of state (see
Traffic Tickets Received Out-Of-State).

Under the state’s “Zero Tolerance Law,” a driver
under age 21 will have their license suspended
for six months if found to have a BAC from .02 to
07. A 02 BAC could occur from only one drink.
For a second Zero Tolerance violation, the driver
license will be revoked for one year or until the
driver turns age 21, whichever is longer.

Speeding and Other Violations

Your driver license will be revoked for at least
six months if you are found guilty of:

« Three speeding and/or misdemeanor traffic
violations within 18 months (based on date
of violation, not date of conviction}.

« Three “passing a stopped school bus”
violations within three years.

« One violation of “leaving the scene of a
personal injury or fatal accident.”

« One “participating in a speed contest” viola-
tion. Conviction of a second speed contest
violation within 12 months results
in a revocation of at least one year.

No Insurance

Your driver license will be revoked for at least
one year if you operate or allow another person
to operate your uninsured vehicle, or if the DMV
receives evidence that you were involved in a
traffic crash without being insured. If the insurance
coverage for your vehicle has expired, you must
turn in the license plates and registration to a mo-
tor vehicle office. If the vehicle is removed from
the road and not being driven, you must return the
plates or you can face civil penalties or registra-
tion suspension and/or license suspension.

Indefinite Suspensions/Revocations

Your driver license will also be suspended in-
definitely if you fail to file an accident report, fail to
pay child support, fail to pay taxes or fail to fulfill a
court judgment that results from a traffic accident.
This suspension will be in effect until you correct
the condition that led to the suspension.

THE POINT SYSTEM

The DMV point system identifies “persistent
violators”, that is, drivers who commit a series of
violations in a short time period. The table in this
chapter lists the point values assigned to various
moving traffic violations.* Note that traffic laws
which must be obeyed on public highways, roads
and streets also apply to parking lots open to
the public.

While each violation listed alone is not serious
enough to require license suspension or revoca-
tion, the accumulation of several violations on
your driving record can indicate that action must
be taken.

*All V&T Law violations result in fines to the
driver in addition to license sanctions.
Driver's Manual | 22

Violation Points Violation Points
Speeding MPH not specified 3 Improper passing, unsafe lane change, drove 3
Speeding MPH over To 10 3 left of center, or drove wrong direction
Zo 0
posted limit: Violation involving a traffic signal, stop sign 3
11to 20 4 or yield sign
2110 30 6 Failing to yield right-of-way 3
31t0 40 8 Railroad crossing violation 5
More than 40 1 NB — Ny n
Leaving scene of incident involving property
Reckless driving 5 damage or injury to domestic animal 3
Passing a stopped school bus 5 Safety restraint violation involving 3
Inadequate brakes 4 person under 16
. Co Inadequate brakes (while driving
Following too closely (tailgating) 4 employer's vehicle) 2
Use of mobile telephone or portable electron-
ic device while operating a motor vehicle 5 Any other moving violation 2

Note: Insurance companies can have their own point systems. These have no relationship to and should not be confused

with the DMV point system.

The point values charged against your record

are from the date you commit the violation, not
the date you are convicted. If you get 11 or more
points within 18 months, you will be notified by
mail that your driver license will be suspended.
You can request a DMV hearing only to show that
the convictions in question were not yours. You
cannot re-argue the convictions or request

the suspension be waived based on

special circumstances.

You can reduce your point total by up to four
points and save up to 10 percent on your auto lia-
bility and collision insurance premiums by taking
a DMV-approved “Motor Vehicle Accident Pre-
vention Course.” Completion of a point reduction
course cannot prevent a mandatory suspension
or revocation or be applied as a “credit” against
future points, or prevent or reduce a Driver Re-
sponsibility Assessment by the DMV.

TRAFFIC CRASHES

At this time, except where required by law,
the term “accident” is frequently replaced by
“crash.” This is because a “crash” can normally be
prevented. If you are involved in a traffic crash in
which another person is killed, your license can
be suspended or revoked after a DMV hearing
even if you were not charged with a violation
when the incident occurred.

FEES AND CIVIL PENALTIES

In most cases, if your driver license has been
suspended for an exact period, like 30 days or 90
days, your license will not be returned until you
pay a non-refundable $50 suspension termination
fee. If your license was suspended as a result of
the Zero Tolerance Law, you will be required to
pay a $125 civil penalty and a $100 suspension
termination fee.

In most cases, if your driver license has been
revoked, you cannot apply for a new license until
you pay a non-refundable $100 fee to reapply for
the license. This fee is not required if your license
was revoked for operating without insurance or
if you were issued a license with conditions or
restricted uses.

Vehicle Owners - A law was passed in 2019
that authorizes school districts and municipalities
to use stop-arm cameras on school buses to
impose penalties on the owners of vehicles which
pass a school bus while the school bus is stopped
for the purpose of dropping off or picking up
passengers and red lights on the school bus
are flashing.

« First violation - penalty of $250

+ Second violation within 18 months - penalty
of $275
23 | Driver's Manual

« Third violation {or more} within 18 months -
penalty of $300

After the following revocations, you must pay a
civil penalty to DMV before your application for a
new license can be accepted:

« Operating without insurance or accident
without insurance: $750 civil penalty.

« Chemical test refusal: $500 civil penalty
{$550 if while driving a commercial motor
vehicle}.

« Chemical test refusal within five years of
an earlier alcohol, drug or refusal-related
revocation: $750 civil penalty.

DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
ASSESSMENTS

In addition to any fines, fees, penalties and sur-
charges authorized by law, you may have to pay
a “Driver Responsibility Assessment” for some
violations that result in a conviction or administra-
tive finding. Your learner permit, driver license or
driving privileges will be suspended if you do not
make these payments.

If you are convicted of Aggravated Driving
While Intoxicated (Agg-DWI}, Driving While Intoxi-
cated (DWI), Driving While Ability Impaired (DWAL),
Driving While Ability Impaired by Drugs, DWAI-al-
cohol combined with drugs, or if you refused to
submit to a chemical test, you will be required to
pay a driver responsibility assessment of $250
each year for the next three years.

If you are convicted of one or more traffic
violations resulting in six points in any 18-month
period, you will be required to pay $100 each
year for the next three years. For each additional
point you receive during that period, you will be
required to pay another $25 per point every year
for three years. For information about how points
are assessed, see “The Point System” in
this chapter.

This assessment applies to motorists convicted
of violations while driving motor vehicles, and
in some cases, motorboats and snowmobiles.

Completion of a DMV-approved “Motor Vehicle
Accident Prevention Course” will not prevent or
reduce the calculation of points that affect the
Driver Responsibility Assessment.

DRIVING WHILE SUSPENDED
OR REVOKED

Itis a criminal offense to drive while your
license is suspended or revoked, and there are
mandatory fines from $200 to $5,000. You can
face mandatory imprisonment or probation. The
vehicle being driven could be seized and forfeit-
ed. More severe penalties apply to drivers who
drive while intoxicated or impaired by alcohol or
drugs while their license or privilege are already
under suspension or revocation for a previous
alcohol or drug-related incident. Drivers with 10 or
more suspensions for failure to answer traffic tick-
ets are also subject to severe penalties. Drivers
with 20 or more suspensions for failure to answer
tickets face a criminal charge, even if you were
not driving when arrested.

CHAPTER 3 / OWNING A VEHICLE

Whether you are a vehicle owner or registrant,
or a driver of a vehicle owned or registered by
someone else, it is your responsibility to make
sure it is registered, insured and inspected before
the vehicle operates on a public roadway.

REGISTRATION AND TITLE

A registration allows a vehicle to be driven
on public roads and highways. A title certificate
proves who owns the vehicle.

You must be at least 16 to register a vehicle.
You can title a vehicle at any age. A new resident
of the state must get a New York registration
within 30 days of establishing residence.

To Register a Vehicle

To register a vehicle, you must prove you own
the vehicle or that the owner authorizes you to
register it, that the vehicle is insured, that the
state and county sales taxes have been paid and
provide any required odometer reading and/or
damage disclosure statement. If the ownership
proofs listed below are not available from the
seller, contact any motor vehicle office or a DMV
Call Center before you purchase the vehicle.

To apply for registration, you must complete
a Vehicle Registration/Title Application (MV-82).
You must also present proof of name (6 points}
and proof of date of birth. For additional informa-
tion see Registering a Vehicle in New York State
{(MV-82.1}, available from the DMV website (search
under Forms} or at any motor vehicle office. When
your vehicle is registered, you will get vehicle
plates, a registration document and a registration
sticker for the windshield or vehicle plates. If you
purchased the vehicle from someone other than
a New York State registered dealership, you will
also receive a 10-day inspection extension sticker
on request when you register the vehicle. You
must then have the vehicle inspected within 10
days from the date of registration. It should have
a valid inspection sticker if you purchased the
vehicle from a New York State registered dealer.
The dealer must have the vehicle inspected within
30 days before they sell the vehicle to you.

Driver's Manual | 24

When you purchase a new or used vehicle
from a dealer registered with the DMV, the dealer
can register the vehicle for you and give you a
temporary registration and, if you need them,
new vehicle plates. The dealer can charge a
processing fee for this service. It can also charge
registration, vehicle plate and title fees.

Your title certificate will be mailed to you sever-
al weeks after the vehicle is registered.

Proof of Ownership

If you purchase your vehicle from a New York
State registered dealer, the proof of ownership for
a new vehicle will be a Manufacturer's Certificate
of Origin (MCO} and a dealer’s Certificate of Sale
{MV-50}. For a used vehicle, proof of ownership is
the previous owner's Certificate of Title (MV-999},
the correct odometer and salvage disclosure
statement and the dealer’s Certificate of
Sale (MV-50}.

If the dealership does not register the vehicle
for you, make sure it gives you the ownership
documents listed above and a completed Appli-
cation for Registration/Title (MV-82} signed by the
dealer's representative. Examine the ownership
documents carefully before closing the sale.

If you purchase a used vehicle from a dealer
registered outside New York State — the proof of
ownership is the title certificate or transferable
registration signed over to the dealer by the previ-
ous owner, plus the bill of sale and/or invoice from
the dealer and other proofs from the dealer.

For a used vehicle purchased from a private
seller — the proof of ownership is the “Certificate
of Title” (MV-999), or a transferable registration for
1972 or older models, signed over to you. The sell-
er must complete and you must acknowledge with
your signature, the correct odometer and damage
disclosure statements.

Before you accept the title certificate from any
seller, check the front of the title for the names
and addresses of “lien” holders. A lien indicates
the current owner owes money on a loan for the
vehicle. If a lien is listed on the title, ask the seller
to give you proof the lien has been paid — in most
cases, it is an official lien release from the lender.
25 | Driver's Manual

If proof is not provided and the loan has not been
paid, the lien holder could repossess the vehicle.

A motor vehicle office will not accept a title cer-
tificate if the correct odometer or damage disclo-
sure statement is not completed, or if information
on the title is adjusted, erased or canceled. This
includes any name or signature.

Disclosure Statements

« If you purchase a vehicle eight model
years old or newer, the DMV will NOT reg-
ister your vehicle or issue you a new title
certificate unless the seller has completed,
and you have signed, both the odometer
and the damage disclosure statements
on the Certificate of Title (MV-999}. These
statements indicate whether the new title
certificate should be described as
“Rebuilt Salvage.”

« If you purchase a vehicle 10 model years
old or newer, make sure the private seller
has completed the odometer statement on
the back of the Certificate of Title (MV-999).
The damage disclosure statement is not
required for vehicles nine model years old
or older. As the buyer, you must confirm
the odometer statement as shown on the
title certificate by writing your initials next
to the odometer box on the title certificate.
Compare the odometer statement on the
title certificate with the odometer reading
in the vehicle.

IMPORTANT: The DMV must examine every ve-
hicle described as “Rebuilt Salvage”, OR SIMILAR
WORDS, for stolen parts before the vehicle can
be registered or titled. If you are to purchase a
vehicle that is registered or titled out-of-state,
contact a DMV Call Center for more information.

Proof of Sales Tax Payment

When you purchase a vehicle from a New York
State registered dealer, the dealer collects the
sales tax.

If you purchase a vehicle from someone other
than a NYS registered dealer, you need to fill out
a Statement of Transaction/Sale or Gift of Motor
Vehicle (DTF-802), which is available at any motor
vehicle office and from the DMV website dmv.

ny.gov. This form certifies the purchase price and
determines the sales tax you must pay when you
register the vehicle. One side of the form must

be completed and signed by the buyer. The other
side must be signed by the seller if the selling
price is below fair market value or if the vehicle is
being given as a gift from someone who is not a
family member. If the form is not completed by the
seller, you will be charged sales tax based on the
current fair market value of the vehicle. Bring the
completed form to a state or county motor vehicle
office when you register your vehicle.

Proof of Insurance

When you purchase vehicle liability insurance,
the insurance agent or broker gives you two
insurance identification cards. The name(s} and
vehicle identification number (VIN} on these cards
must exactly match the information on the reg-
istration application. You must present one card
when you register your vehicle. Keep the second
card with the vehicle.

Fees

Registrations for most vehicles with a maximum
gross weight of not more than 18,000 pounds
(8,165 kg} are valid for two years, and fees are
based on vehicle weight. There are also vehicle
plate and title fees.

By law, registration fees cannot be refunded if
you use the vehicle plates or registration sticker
on your vehicle even for one day. However, if
your vehicle plates and registration sticker are
returned unused within 60 days after you register
your vehicle, you can receive a full refund, minus
a processing fee. You may receive a refund of the
fee for the second year of a two-year registration,
minus a processing fee, if you use the plates &
registration only during the first year. Make sure
to get a DMV Universal Receipt (FS-6T} to turn in
your plates.

If you transfer a registration from one vehicle
to a replacement vehicle, you will receive credit
for the remaining part of your current registration.
This credit cannot be applied to other vehicles
registered to you.
Trading In or Selling Your Old Car

Before you trade in or sell your old vehicle,
make sure to remove the vehicle plates and the
windshield registration sticker, which shows your
plate number. This can prevent you from being
charged with parking tickets that are not yours.

REGISTRATION RENEWAL

Most registrations are renewed every two
years. Approximately 45 to 60 days before your
registration will expire, you should receive a
renewal reminder in the mail. If you changed your
address and did not notify the DMV, you will not
receive the reminder. If you did not answer three
or more parking tickets, or if your registration is
suspended or revoked, you will not receive the
reminder. Allow two weeks to process and deliver
the registration. You are responsible to know
when your registration expires and to renew it on
time. This is true even if you do not get a reminder
in the mail.

If the expiration date falls on a weekend or le-
gal state holiday, your registration is automatically
extended to midnight of the next business day.
Make sure you maintain liability insurance on your
vehicle during the extension period.

If you have not received a renewal notice, you
may be able to renew your registration —

By mail: Complete a Vehicle Registration/Title
Application (MV-82}, available at any motor vehi-
cle office and from the DMV website dmv.ny.gov
{search under Forms}. If your registration must be
sent to an address that is not the mailing address
you entered on the application form (MV-82},
enclose a separate note that requests the DMV
to mail your registration to the other address. Do
not put this mailing address on form MV-82 unless
you want it to appear on the registration and
your DMV registration record. Reminder — if you
indicate a change of address on your registration,
it will affect ONLY that registration. Use a Change
of Address Form (MV-232} to change all your
DMV records. This form is available at any motor
vehicle office and from the DMV website (search
under Forms}.

Enclose a check or money order for the correct
fee, payable to the “Commissioner of Motor

Driver's Manual | 26

Vehicles.” If you do not know the exact fee you
must pay, you can determine the fee using the
Schedules of Registration Fees (MV-204A} avail-
able at any motor vehicle office or through a work
page at the DMV website. Make sure to include
your insurance card with your renewal application
if your insurance company has changed and you
have not responded to a DMV Insurance

Inquiry Letter.

Mail your completed Vehicle Registration/Title
Application and other documents to:

NYS DMV Utica Processing Center, P.O. Box
359, Utica, NY 13503.

Allow two weeks to receive your registration
renewal. If you do not receive it after two weeks,
contact a DMV Call Center or visit any state or
county motor vehicle office. Allow more time for
overseas mail.

If your name has changed and you have not
notified the DMV, you must visit a DMV office and
show proofs of your identity. For more informa-
tion, contact a DMV Call Center.

Online at the DMV website dmv.ny.gov: Online
registration renewal requires that you have not
changed your address or insurance company, and
that the registration is for a passenger car, small
commercial truck or a motorcycle that is not used
exclusively off road. Your registration fee, and any
related fees, will be displayed on the computer
screen. In three quick steps, you can renew your
registration online and use your credit card for
payment. Your renewal will be automatically pro-
cessed and mailed to you. Allow two weeks for
delivery.

In person at a state or county motor vehicle
office: You must complete and submit a Vehicle
Registration/Title Application {(MV-82). Note: An
application brought into an office by a second
party {someone who is not the registrant} must be
accompanied by the original New York license/
permit/non-driver identification card for the sec-
ond party and either the original or a photocopy
for the registrant. This includes spouses (hus-
bands and wives). The application must be signed
by the registrant, not the person who brings the
form into the office.
27 | Driver's Manual

Insurance

Your vehicle must be covered by liability insur-
ance as long as it is registered, even if you do not
drive it.

Minimum liability coverage is required of
$50,000 against the death of one person and
$100,000 against the death of two or more per-
sons, $25,000 against injury to one person and
$50,000 against injury to two or more persons
and $10,000 against property damage. Insurance
coverage limits refer to death, injury or damage
related to any one incident.

Before your liability insurance expires or is
discontinued, return vehicle plates at any state
or county motor vehicle office. Be sure to obtain
a DMV Universal Receipt (FS-6T) to turn in your
vehicle plates. If you do not do this, you may have
to pay a civil penalty for each day the vehicle
was not insured or your vehicle registration can
be suspended. If your vehicle is not insured for
90 days, unless you have turned in your vehicle
plates, your driver license will also be suspended.

If you receive a letter from DMV that asks
about your vehicle insurance, read it carefully and
respond as directed in the letter.

Motorcycles must be insured, but you are not
required to turn in the vehicle plate when your
motorcycle insurance is discontinued or expires.

RESIDENT AND NON-RESIDENT
RESPONSIBILITY

Anyone who drives or permits a vehicle to be
driven in New York State, this includes people
who are not New York residents, must be able
to prove the vehicle has acceptable liability
insurance, (see “Insurance,” above, for minimum
insurance coverage required). If you are convicted
of driving an uninsured vehicle or if you allow an-
other person to drive your uninsured vehicle, your
license or privilege to drive in New York State will
be revoked for at least one year. The same penal-
ty applies if the DMV receives evidence that you
were involved in a traffic crash without insurance.

INSPECTION

Most vehicles sold in New York State must be
inspected within 30 days of the date of transfer
or sale and must have a certificate of inspection
before delivery. If you purchase a vehicle from
someone who is not a NYS dealer, you must have
the vehicle inspected within 10 days after you
register it. Make sure to request a “Ten-Day Time
Extension for Motor Vehicle Inspection” (VS-1077).
If a person moves to NYS, an inspection certifi-
cate that was issued before is valid until it expires
or one year from the date it was issued,
whichever occurs first.

Under some conditions, vehicles sold at retail
are exempt from the inspection requirement.
These conditions are: transfer to a “welfare to
work” program; transfer of a chassis; transfer of
a vehicle through factory direct delivery; transfer
of a vehicle for registration in another state or
country; transfer of a scrap vehicle; and transfer of
a vehicle to a long-term lessee (lease buyout).

After the first inspection of your vehicle, it
must be inspected at an official state-licensed
inspection station before the expiration date on
the current inspection certificate. An inspection is
also required on change of registrant. Inspection
stations have yellow and black “Official Motor
Vehicle Inspection Station” signs. Heavy trucks,
buses, tractors and semi-trailers must be inspect-
ed at special “Heavy Vehicle” Inspection Stations
and motorcycles at special Motorcycle
Inspection Stations.

Putting your signature on a registration renewal
form certifies that the vehicle was inspected as
required by law. Keep track of when your annual
inspection is. Schedule a new inspection early, so
you will have time to repair your vehicle if it does
not pass.

After inspection, the vehicle inspector will issue
a sticker for the vehicle to prove it has passed in-
spection. If your vehicle did not pass, the inspec-
tor will give you a rejection notice. In most cases,
your vehicle must be repaired to meet standards
and must be inspected again. A vehicle that is
subject to a high enhanced or OBD Il emissions
inspection that fails a first inspection can qualify
for a waiver. An attempt must be made to repair
the malfunction and the cost for repairs must be
at least $450. Many gasoline-powered vehicles
{except motorcycles) must be inspected for
exhaust emissions during the safety inspection.
Exceptions are gasoline-powered vehicles that
are 26 or more model years old, or less than two
model years old, or registered as historic. Those
vehicles are subject to a safety inspection only.

Diesel-powered vehicles that operate in NYS,
even if registered elsewhere, are subject to ran-
dom roadside safety tests by the NYS Police and
the NYS Department of Transportation. Vehicles
with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR} more
than 8,500 pounds are subject to a Diesel fuel
emissions inspection.

COMPLAINTS AGAINST BUSINESSES

The DMV regulates motor vehicle dealers,
inspection stations and auto repair shops. These
businesses should be identified by registration or

J

Driver's Manual | 28

license certificates and outside signs. Make sure
you are dealing with a registered or
licensed business.

If you have a complaint against one of these
businesses, first try to resolve it with the manage-
ment. If that fails, call (518) 474-8943 between
8:30 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. weekdays. You can also
write to Vehicle Safety Services, DMV, Bureau of
Consumer and Facility Services, Box 2700-ESP,
Albany, N.Y., 12220-0700. By regulation, the DMV
can receive a repair shop complaint only within
90 days or 3,000 miles (4,828 km} of the vehicle
repairs, whichever comes first.

29 | Driver's Manual

PTER 4 / TRAFFIC CONTROL

SIGNS

Traffic signs tell you about traffic rules, special
hazards, where you are, how to get where you are
going and where services are available.

The shape and color of traffic signs give indica-
tions to the type of information they provide:

REGULATION SIGNS normally are white rectan-
gles with black letters or symbols, but some are
different shapes, and some can use red letters
or symbols.

WARNING SIGNS normally are yellow and dia-
mond-shaped, with black letters or symbols.

DESTINATION SIGNS are green with white letters
and symbols.

SERVICE SIGNS are blue with white letters and
symbols.

Know the signs shown below and what they
indicate. You will be asked about them on your

written test.

Here are descriptions of common traffic signs
and what they indicate.

REGULATION SIGNS
Stop Sign

COLOR: Red, with white
letters

MEANING: Come to a full
stop, yield the right-of-way to vehicles and pedes-
trians in or heading toward the intersection. Go
when it is safe. You must come to a stop before
the stop line, if there is one. If not, you must

RULES OF THE ROAD

stop before you enter the crosswalk. (See “Stop
Crosswalk Lines” under the “Pavement Markings”
section of this chapter} If there is no stop line or
crosswalk, you must stop before you enter the
intersection, at the point nearest the intersection
that gives you a view of traffic on the

intersecting roadway.

Yield Sign

COLOR: Red and white, with
red letters.

MEANING: Decrease speed

as you reach the intersec-

tion. Prepare to stop and yield the right-of-way
to vehicles and pedestrians in or heading toward
the intersection. You must come to a full stop at
a YIELD sign if traffic conditions require it. When
you approach a YIELD sign, check carefully for
traffic, and be prepared to stop.

Other Regulation Signs

COLOR: White,
with black and/
or red letters or
symbols

MEANING:

These signs give information about rules for traffic
direction, lane use, turns, speed, parking and
other special requirements.

Some regulation signs have a red circle with
a slash over a symbol. This indicates that an
action, like a right turn, is not allowed or that some
vehicles are restricted from the road. Rectangular
white signs with black or red letters or symbols
are indications to be alert for special rules.

WARNING SIGNS:

COLOR: Yellow,
with black letters or
symbols

NARROW
BRIDGE,

MEANING: You are

approaching a haz- 20%
ardous location or a

location where there

is a special rule, as shown in the sample signs.
Sometimes a warning sign is joined with a yellow
and black “recommended speed” sign. This indi-
cates reduced speed is advised in that area.

Work Area Signs

COLOR: A
Orange, with fend y

black letters he/
or symbols

MEANING: People are at work on or near the
roadway and traffic can be controlled by a flag
person. A work area speed limit as low as 25 MPH
(40 km/h} can be posted. Even if no speed limit

is provided, you must drive at a reduced speed
through the work zone and you must always obey
the flag persons. These illustrations show some
signals a flag person will use. Know and

obey them.

STOP

SLOW

Driver's Manual | 30

DESTINATION SIGNS:

<«— ROCHESTER 55

COLOR: Green, with white LOCKPORT 10 =»
letters :

MEANING: Show the direction and distance to
locations.

60) 29

Route Signs
COLOR: Varied.

MEANING: Indicate interstate, U.S., state

or county routes. The shape tells you the type of
route you are on. The sample signs, left to right,
are for state, U.S., and interstate routes. When you
plan a trip, use a highway map to decide which
routes to take. During the trip, watch for destina-
tion signs so you will not get lost, or have to turn

or stop suddenly.

MEANING: Show the location of services,
like rest areas, gas stations, camping or
medical facilities.

SERVICE SIGNS:

COLOR: Blue,
with white letters
or symbols

TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Traffic Lights

Traffic lights are normally
red, yellow and green from
the top to bottom or left to
right. At some intersections,
there are lone red, yellow
or green lights. Some traffic
lights are steady, others flash.
Some are round, and some are arrows. State law
requires that if the traffic lights or controls are out
of service or do not operate correctly when you
approach an intersection, you must come to a
stop as you would for a stop sign. You must then
continue according to the rules of right-of-way,
unless you are told to continue by a
traffic officer.

31 | Driver's Manual

Here is what different traffic lights indicate:

STEADY RED: Stop. Do not go until the light is
green. If a green arrow is shown with the red light,
you can go only toward the arrow and only if the
intersection is clear.

You can make a right turn at a steady red light
after you come to a full stop and yield the right-of
way to oncoming traffic and pedestrians. You can
make a left turn at a steady red light when you
turn from a one-way road into another one-way
road after you come to a full stop and yield the
right-of-way to oncoming traffic and pedestrians.

You cannot make a turn at a red light if there is
a NO TURN ON RED sign posted or another sign,
signal or pavement marking prevents the turn.
You are not allowed to turn on a red light in New
York City unless a sign that permits it is posted.

The driver of a school bus containing students
cannot turn right on any red light.
RED ARROW: Do not go in the di-
rection of the arrow until the red arrow light is off

and a green light or arrow light goes on. A right or
left turn on red is not permitted at a red arrow.

FLASHING RED: Means the same
as a STOP sign: Stop, yield the
right-of-way, and go when it is safe.

STEADY YELLOW: Be prepared to

stop. A steady yellow light means

the traffic signal is about to turn red. | 4
FLASHING YELLOW: Drive with

caution.

YELLOW ARROW: The protection of a green
arrow will end. If you intend to turn in the direction
of the arrow, be prepared to stop.

STEADY GREEN: Go, but yield the
right-of-way to other traffic at the

intersection as required by law (see | yr

Chapter 5).

GREEN ARROW: You can go in the

direction of the arrow, but you must

yield the right-of-way to other traffic | yr
at the intersection as required by

law (see Chapter 5).

Lane Use Control Lights

Special above the pavement lights are sometimes
used to indicate which lanes of a highway can be
used at certain times:

STEADY RED “X”: Do not drive in this lane.
STEADY YELLOW “X”: Move from this lane.

FLASHING YELLOW “X”: This lane can only be
used for a left turn.

GREEN ARROW: You can use this lane.

PAVEMENT MARKINGS

Vv

Lines and symbols on the roadway divide lanes
and tell you when you can pass other vehicles or
change lanes. They also tell you which lanes to
use for turns and where you must stop for signs
or traffic signals. The arrows on these illustrations
show the direction of traffic.

Edge and Lane Lines

Solid lines along the side of the road tell you
where its edge is — where the travel lane ends
and the shoulder begins. It is illegal to drive
across the edge line, except when told to by a
police officer or other authorized official or when
allowed by an official sign. An edge line that
angles towards the center of the road shows that
the road is narrower ahead.

Lines that separate lanes of traffic that move in
the same direction are white. Lines that separate
traffic that moves in opposite directions are yel-
low. There may be two lines between lanes and
lines can be solid or broken. Read Chapter 6 for
the Rules on how to pass other vehicles.

What some lane lines indicate:
One broken line: You can pass other vehicles

or change lanes if you can do so safely without
interfering with traffic.

4 PASSING PERMITTED

Mm) PASSING PERMITTED

Solid line with broken line: If you are on the side
with the solid line, you cannot pass other vehicles
or go across the line except to make a left turn
into a driveway. If you are on the side with the
broken line, you can pass if it is safe to and you
will not interfere with traffic.

«- NO PASSING NO PASSING
re — — ——]
mp NO PASSING PASSING PERMITTED

Double solid lines: You cannot pass or change
lanes. You cannot go across the lines except to
turn left to enter or leave the highway (e.g. to or
from a driveway or to do a U-turn, see

Chapter 5).

EE MUST STAY IN LANE
_—
HE) MUST STAY IN LANE

One solid line: You can pass other vehicles or
change lanes, but you can only do so when ob-
structions in the road or traffic conditions make
it necessary.

-
»

Driver's Manual | 32

Stop and Crosswalk Lines: At an intersection
controlled by a STOP sign, YIELD sign or
traffic light, there can
be a white stop line
painted across the
lane, (called a Stop =i |
Line) and/or two + |F9
parallel lines painted
across the road (called
a Crosswalk}. When
required to stop be-
cause of a sign or light,
you must stop before
you reach the stop line,
if there is one, or the
crosswalk. You need
only stop at a stop line
or crosswalk if required

to by a light, sign or

traffic officer, or to yield
to a pedestrian, in-line
skater or scooter ata
marked or unmarked crosswalk. A single stop line
may be placed at intersections to allow room for
larger vehicles {such as tractor-trailers, buses, and
trucks} to turn without forcing other traffic to back
up. It's important that you stop before you reach
this stop line (See “Pedestrians” in Chapter 11}.

Arrows: Arrows show which lanes you must use.
In this illustration, for example, you can turn right
only from the right lane. To go straight, you must
use the left lane. You must be in the correct lane
before you reach the solid line that separates
the lanes.

|]
33 | Driver's Manual

Diamond Symbol: This symbol indicates the lane « What must vou do at a STOP sign?

is reserved lanes for buses, HOV (High-Occupan-

cy Vehicles} like car-pools and van-pools, bicycles « What must you do when you encounter each
or other special vehicles. You cannot enter and of the following: a flashing red light, flashing
use these lanes unless your vehicle complies with yellow light, steady yellow light, a red light
the occupancy or other requirements indicated with a green arrow?

by signs for the times the special conditions are

in effect. When used to designate reserved lanes + What does it indicate if an edge line angles
on city streets, sections of the solid white line that in toward the center af the road?

separates the diamond lanes from the normal |
lanes can be replaced by broken white lines. In + What do each of these lines indicate: one
these locations, non-HOV can enter the HOV lane broken, one solid, double solid, solid and

if they make a right turn at the next intersection. en together?

Bus lanes and HOV lanes are to promote the

most efficient use of limited street and highway « If an intersection has crosswalk lines but no
capacity. They assure that vehicles with the STOP line, where must you stop for a red
highest importance move the fastest. light at that intersection?

+ What type of pavement marking shows you
[3 which lane you must use for a turn?

[3 > + Which of The following must you obey over
the other three: red light, flashing red light,

STOP sign, police officer?
TRAFFIC OFFICERS | |

Directions given by traffic officers take prece-
dence over signs, signals or pavement markings.
If a traffic officer signals you to stop at a green
light, for example, you must stop. If an officer sig-
nals you to drive through a red light or stop sign,
you must do it.

Among the persons authorized to direct traffic
are police officers, fire police, highway work area
flag persons and school crossing persons, and
school bus drivers.

QUESTIONS

Before you move on to Chapter 5, make sure
you can identify the signs in this chapter and
know what they mean. Also, make sure you can
answer these questions:

« A regulation sign is normally what shape?

+ What is the normal color and shape of a
warning sign?

~What color and s apeisa destination =

APTER 5 / INTERSECTIONS AND TURNS

Most traffic crashes occur at intersections when
a driver makes a turn. Many occur in large parking
lots like at shopping centers. To prevent this type
of crash, you must understand the right-of-way
rules and how to make correct turns.

RIGHT-OF-WAY

Traffic signs, signals and pavement markings
do not always resolve traffic conflicts. A green
light, for example, does not resolve the conflict
of when a car turns left at an intersection while
an approaching car goes straight through the
intersection. The right-of-way rules help resolve
these conflicts. They tell you who goes first and
who must wait in different conditions.

Here are examples of right-of-way rules:

« A driver who approaches an intersection
must yield the right-of-way to traffic that is
in the intersection.

Example: You approach an intersection. The
traffic light is green and you want to drive straight
through. Another vehicle, is already in the
intersection making a left turn. You must let that
vehicle complete its turn before you enter the
intersection.

« If drivers approaching from opposite di-
rections reach an intersection at about the
same time, a driver that turns left must yield
to traffic that moves straight or turns right.

Example: You want to turn left at an intersection
ahead. A vehicle reaches the intersection from the
opposite direction and moves straight ahead. You
must wait for approaching traffic to go through
before you turn. You may enter the intersection to
prepare for your left turn if the light is green and
no other vehicle ahead of you plans to make a
left turn {see “Turns” later in this chapter). When
you enter the intersection, keep to the right of the
center line. Keep your wheels straight to prevent
being pushed into oncoming traffic if your vehicle
is hit from behind. When traffic headed toward
you clears or stops for a red light, complete your
turn when you can do so safely.

Driver's Manual | 34

You must also yield to traffic headed toward
you when you turn left into a driveway, parking lot
or other area, even if there are no signs or signals
that control the turn.

For any left turn, the law requires you to yield
to any traffic headed toward you that is close
enough to be a hazard. The decision about when
traffic is too close takes experience and judg-
ment. If you have any concern, wait for traffic to
pass before you turn left.

« At intersections not controlled by signs or
signals, or where two or more drivers stop at
STOP signs at the same time and they
are at right angles, the driver on the left
must yield the right-of-way to the driver on
the right.

Example: You are stopped at a stop sign and you
are going to go straight through the intersection.
A driver on the cross road has stopped at a stop
sign on your right and is also going to go straight.
You must yield the right-of-way to the other driver.

« A vehicle that enters a roadway from a
driveway, private road or another place that
is not a roadway, must stop and yield the
right-of-way to traffic on the roadway and
to pedestrians.

Example: You intend to leave a parking lot and
turn right when you enter a street. You are driving
out of a parking lot and turn right as you enter a
street. A vehicle approaches from your left. You
must stop and wait for the vehicle to pass before
you enter the street. If you were to turn left, you
would have to yield to vehicles that approach
from both directions. If a pedestrian walked
across the parking lot exit, you would have to
wait for that person to go across.

« Drivers must yield to pedestrians who
legally use marked or unmarked crosswalks.
This means you must slow down or stop
if necessary. In all situations, drivers must
take care to avoid colliding with pedestrians
and bicyclists.

Example: You are stopped at a red light. A pedes-
trian steps into the crosswalk, and then the light
turns green. You must wait for the pedestrian to
go across. You must also yield to pedestrians in
35 | Driver's Manual

crosswalks on your left or right before you turn.

« You cannot enter an intersection if traffic is
backed up on the other side and you can-
not get completely through the intersection.
Wait until traffic ahead clears, so you do not
block the intersection.

« Be alert to cross-streets or offset intersec-
tions, so that you don’t cause gridlock by
blocking another street.

«+ A driver who approaches a traffic circle or
rotary must yield the right-of-way to drivers
already in the circle. {For more information
on how to drive in a rotary see “How to
Drive Through a Roundabout” in Chapter 8
of this manual.)

EMERGENCY VEHICLES

You must yield the right-of-way to fire, ambu-
lance, police and other authorized emergency ve-
hicles when they respond to emergencies. They
will display lights that are flashing red, red and
blue or red and white and/or may sound a siren or
air-horn. {Vehicles responding to emergencies for
a Police Department, Sheriff Department or the
New York State Troopers are not always required
to use an audible siren or horn.) When you hear or
see an emergency vehicle heading toward your
vehicle from any direction, safely pull over im-
mediately to the right edge of the road and stop.
Wait until the emergency vehicle passes before
you drive on. If you are in an intersection, drive
out of it before you pull over.

You must pull over and stop for an emergency
vehicle even if it is headed toward you in the
opposite lane of a two-way roadway.

If you hear a siren or air-horn close by but do
not know exactly where the emergency vehicle
is, you must safely pull over to the right-side edge
of the road and stop until you are sure itis not
headed toward you.

An emergency vehicle that uses lights and a
siren or air-horn can be unpredictable. The driver
can legally exceed the speed limit, pass red lights
and STOP or YIELD signs, go the wrong way on

one-way streets and turn in directions not normal-
ly allowed. Although emergency vehicle drivers
are required to be careful, you must be cautious
when an emergency vehicle heads toward you.

Move Over Law

This law requires every driver to exercise care
to avoid colliding with an authorized emergen-
cy or hazard vehicle that is parked, stopped or
standing on the shoulder or any portion of the
highway with its emergency lights activated or
one or more amber hazard lights activated or
combination of one or more amber hazard lights
and one or more blue lights activated. Drivers
must reduce speed on all roads when encoun-
tering such vehicles, but on parkways, interstates
and other controlled access roads with multiple
lanes, drivers are further required to move from
the lane adjacent to the emergency or hazard
vehicle unless traffic or other hazards prevent
doing so safely. Drivers are also required to move
over for vehicles with blue and green lights which
are described in the next section. Violations of
this law are punishable as a moving violation.

BLUE, GREEN AND AMBER LIGHTS

Personal vehicles driven by volunteer fire
fighters responding to alarms are allowed to
display blue lights and those driven by volunteer
ambulance or rescue squad members can display
green lights. Amber lights on hazard vehicles
such as snow plows and tow trucks or the com-
bination of amber lights and rear projected blue
lights on hazard vehicles designed for towing or
pushing disabled vehicles, warn other drivers of
possible dangers. Flashing amber lights are also
used on rural mail delivery vehicles and school
buses to warn traffic of their presence. The vehi-
cles that display blue, green or amber lights are
not authorized emergency vehicles. Their drivers
must obey all traffic laws. While you are not
required to yield the right-of-way, you should yield
as a courtesy if you can safely do so.

TURNS

Always signal before you turn or change lanes.
It is important that other highway users know your
intentions. The law requires you to
signal a turn or lane change with your turn lights
or hand signals at least 100 feet (30 m} ahead.
A good safety tip is, when possible, to signal
your intention to turn before you begin to brake
or make the turn. The proper hand signals are
shown below.

Driver's Manual | 36

RIGHT TURN:

As you prepare to turn, get as far to the right
as possible. Do not make wide, sweeping turns.
Unless signs direct you to do otherwise, turn into
the right lane of the road you enter.

1
11K

RIGHT STOP

Remember these other tips when you prepare
to turn:

« Reduce your speed.

«+ Be alert for traffic on all sides. Take special
caution to check for motorcycles. Most
crashes that involve motorcycles and other
vehicles are caused because the driver
of the other vehicle has failed to see
the motorcycle.

« Keep your wheels straight until you actually
begin to make your turn. If your wheels are
turned, and you are hit from behind, your
vehicle could be pushed into the oncoming
lane of traffic.

« Remember that your rear wheels will travel
inside the path of the front wheels, nearer
to the curb {right turn} or to traffic headed
toward you {left turn).

« Watch for pedestrians, bicyclists and mo-
ped riders, especially on right turns. They
are often difficult to see in traffic.

« Be especially alert to individuals in wheel
chairs, people pushing strollers, or some-
one pulling a wheeled suitcase behind
them. They may be closer to the ground
and hidden behind a car.

The following illustrations show the correct
position of your vehicle for turns. These positions
are from requirements in the law and are not just
good advice.

LEFT TURN FROM ONE-WAY ROAD INTO ONE-
WAY ROAD:

Move into the left lane when you prepare to
turn. If the road you enter has two lanes, you must
turn into its left lane.

I

4 ONE WAY

LEFT TURN FROM ONE-WAY ROAD INTO
TWO-WAY ROAD:

Approach the turn in the left lane. As you pro-
ceed through the intersection, enter the two-way
road to the right of its center line, but as close as
possible to the center line. Be alert for traffic that
approaches from the road to the left. Motorcycles
are hard to see, and it is hard to judge their speed
and distance away.

:

AVM INO Pb

37 | Driver’s Manual

LEFT TURN FROM TWO-WAY ROAD INTO
TWO-WAY ROAD:

«4 TWO WAY b

« AVM OoMLp»
ed
ny

Approach the turn from the right half of the
roadway closest to the center. Try to use the left
side of the intersection to help make sure that you
do not interfere with traffic headed toward you
that wants to turn left. Keep to the right of the cen-
terline of the road you enter, but as close as pos-
sible to the center line. Be alert for traffic heading
toward you from the left and from the lane you are
about to go across. Motorcycles headed toward
you are hard to see and it is difficult to judge their
speed and distance away. Drivers often fail to see
a motorcycle headed toward them and hit it while
they turn across a traffic lane.

LEFT TURN FROM TWO-WAY ROAD INTO ONE-
WAY ROAD:

TT

4 ONE WAY

2)
HE

Approach the turn from the right half of the road-
way closest to the center. Make the turn before
you reach the center of the intersection and turn
into the left lane of the road you enter.

LEFT TURN FROM TWO-WAY ROAD INTO
FOUR-LANE HIGHWAY:

Approach the turn from the right half of the
roadway closest to the center. Enter the left lane,
to the right of the center line. When traffic permits,
you can move out of the left lane.

U-TURNS

A “U-turn” is any turn you make so you can
proceed in the opposite direction.

Do not try a U-turn on a highway unless
absolutely necessary. If you must turn around,
use a parking lot, driveway or other area, and, if
possible, enter the roadway as you move forward,
not backing up.

You can make a U-turn only from the left
portion of the lane nearest to the centerline of the
roadway, never from the right lane. Unless signs
tell you otherwise, you can make a U-turn when
you get permission to proceed by a green arrow
left turn traffic signal, provided it is allowed and
you yield to other traffic.

You cannot make a U-turn near the top of a hill,
a curve or any other location where other drivers
cannot see your vehicle from 500 feet (150 m}
away in either direction. U-turns are also illegal in
business districts of New York City and where NO
U-TURN signs are provided. You can never make
a U-turn on a limited access expressway, even if
paths connect your side of the expressway with
the other side. In addition, it is prohibited for a
vehicle to make a U-turn in a school zone.

Unless prohibited, a three-point turn can be
used to turn around on a narrow, two-way street.
You may be required to make a three-point turn
on your road test.
To make a three-point turn:

1. Signal with your right turn signal, then pull over
to the right and stop. Signal with your left turn
signal, then check carefully for traffic from

all directions.

2. Turn left, go across the road so you come to
a stop while you face the left curb or edge of
the road.

3. Look again for traffic. Turn your steering wheel
as far to the right as possible, then look behind
you as you back up. Stop before you reach the
right curb or any obstacle to the right curb or
edge of the road.

4. Stop, check again for other traffic, then turn
your steering wheel all the way to the left and pull
forward to complete your turn when it is safe.

QUESTIONS

Before you go on to Chapter 6, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« What is the hand signal for a stop?

« If two drivers enter an intersection from op-
posite directions at the same time, and one
travels straight, the other prepares to turn
left, which must vield the right-of-way?

< Arnghtturne

« If you enter an intersection to make a left

turn, but oncoming traffic prevents the turn
i i ?

« If you reach an intersection that is not con-
trolled at the same time as a driver on your

Driver's Manual | 38

right, and both of you prepare to go straight,
who has the right-of-way?

«What must you do IT you enter a road from
a driveway?

« You face a green light, but traffic on the
other side of the intersection does not allow
you to travel all the way through the inter-
section. May you enter the intersection?

- Does a vehicle prepared Io enter a rani cir-
cle or rotary have right-of-way over vehicles
in the circle?

« What will you do if you hear a siren nearby
but cannot see where the emergency
vehicle is?

+ When you prepare for a right turn, should
you remain as near the center of the lane
as possible?

« Where must you position your vehicle when
you prepare to make a left turn from a two-

39 | Driver's Manual

CHAPTER 6 / HOW TO PASS

The law requires that we drive on the right
side of the road. When we are allowed to pass
other vehicles, we usually pass on the left. You
are permitted to pass on the right only in certain
circumstances and it must be done only when
necessary and safe. When you pass other vehicles
or change lanes to keep away from hazards, do
so with caution and only when necessary. You
must not exceed the speed limit to pass another
vehicle.

When you pass a motorcycle, remember to
give the motorcycle the same full-lane width as
other vehicles are allowed. Never move into the
same lane space as a motorcycle, even if the lane
is wide and the motorcycle is to one side.

When you pass a bicycle, be sure to give the
cyclist sufficient space to ride. When overtaking a
bicyclist from behind, the law requires you to pass
on the left at a safe distance until the bicycle has
been cleared.

The law requires you to use turn signal lamps
or hand and arm signals to indicate your intention
to change lanes at least 100 feet (30 m} before
you make a lane change. You must never pass a
vehicle that has stopped at a crosswalk to allow a
pedestrian to go across.

HOW TO PASS ON THE LEFT

The left lane is normally used to pass other
vehicles. You cannot pass a vehicle on the left if:

« Your lane has a solid yellow center line.

«+ You cannot safely return to the right lane
before you reach a solid yellow center line
for the right lane.

«+ You cannot safely return to the right lane
before any oncoming vehicle comes within
200 feet (60 m} of you.

«+ You approach a curve or the top of a hill on
a two-way road and cannot see around or
over it.

«+ You are within 100 feet (30 m} of a railroad
crossing on a two-way roadway.

« You are within 100 feet {30 m} of a bridge,
tunnel or viaduct on a two-way road and
your view is obstructed.

« If you try to pass, you will interfere with
oncoming traffic.

If conditions are correct to pass, check in your
mirrors and signal your lane change. Before you
pull into the left lane, look quickly over your left
shoulder, through the back side window, to make
sure there is no vehicle close behind you in the
left lane. Never depend on your mirrors when you
prepare to change lanes. Even correctly adjusted
mirrors will leave “blind spots” behind both sides
of your vehicle. If a vehicle is in the blind spot, you
may not see it in your mirrors. Always quickly look
over your shoulder before you change lanes
or pass.

When you pass, move completely into the left
lane. Before you return to the right lane, signal
and look at your interior rear-view mirror and
make sure you can see the front bumper of the
vehicle you passed. Look quickly over your right
shoulder to make sure that you can see at least
several feet of pavement between your vehicle
and the one you passed. Then return to the
right lane.

HOW TO PASS ON THE RIGHT

You can normally pass other vehicles on the
left, some situations allow you to pass on the
right. You can pass a vehicle on the right only in
the conditions listed below and only if you can
pass safely. You cannot drive on or across the
shoulder or edge line of the road unless a sign
allows it or when indicated by a traffic officer (see
Chapter 4). You can pass on the right:

« When a vehicle ahead makes a left turn.

« When you are on a two-way road that is
marked for two or more lanes or is wide
enough for two or more lanes in each
direction and passing is not prohibited by
signs or restricted by parked cars or
other obstructions.

« When you drive on a one-way road that is
marked for two or more lanes or is wide
enough for two or more lanes, and to pass
is not prohibited by signs or restricted by
parked cars or other obstructions.

If you prepare to pass on the right at an inter-
section, check the traffic ahead carefully. Make
sure a vehicle that is approaching is not prepared
to turn left into your path, and watch at the right
side of the road for pedestrians, bicyclists, in-line
skaters and moped riders.

Before a school bus stops to load or discharge
passengers, the driver will usually flash yellow
warning lights, which are located on the front
and back of the bus near the roof. When you see
them, decrease speed and be prepared to stop.

BEING PASSED

If another vehicle passes you on the left,
decrease your speed slightly and stay centered in
your lane. When the vehicle has safely passed and
is ahead of you, continue at your normal speed.

If you find that you are being passed on the
right by many vehicles, you should move into the
right lane and allow them to pass you on the left.

SCHOOL BUSES

When a stopped school bus flashes its red
light{s}, traffic that approaches from either direc-
tion, even in front of the school and in school
parking lots, must stop before it reaches the bus.
You should stop at least 20 feet (6 m} away from
the bus. You can identify this bus by a “SCHOOL
BUS” sign, the red lights on the top and its unique
yellow-orange color.

Before a school bus stops to load or discharge
passengers, the driver will usually yellow flash
warning lights, which are located on the front
and back of the bus near the roof. When you see
them, decrease speed and be prepared to stop.

When you stop for a school bus, you cannot
drive again until the bus starts moving again or
when the bus driver or a traffic officer signals
that you can proceed. This law applies on all
roadways in New York State. You must stop for a

Driver's Manual | 40

school bus even if it is on the opposite side of a
divided highway.

After you stop for a school bus, look for chil-
dren along the side of the road. Drive slowly until
you have passed them.

Safety Tip: Most school bus-related deaths and
injuries occur while children cross the street after
being discharged from the bus, not in collisions
that involve school buses.

Remember that vehicles that transport people
with disabilities can be equipped as school buses
and you must stop for them as you would for
other school buses.

The fine when you pass a stopped school bus
ranges from a minimum of $250 for a first viola-
tion to a maximum of $1,000 for three violations in
three years. If you are convicted of three of these
violations in three years, your driver license will
be revoked for a minimum of
six months.

Vehicle Owners - A law was passed in 2019
that authorizes school districts and municipalities
to use stop-arm cameras on school buses to
impose penalties on the owners of vehicles which
pass a school bus while the school bus is stopped
for the purpose of dropping off or picking up
passengers and red lights on the school bus are
flashing.

First violation - penalty of $250

+ Second violation within 18 months - penalty
of $275

« Third violation {or more} within 18 months -
penalty of $300
|]
41 | Driver's Manual

QUESTIONS

Before you go on to Chapter 7, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« Under most conditions, on which side can
you pass another vehicle that is headed the
ame direction?

<What should you do belore you pass
anather vehicle?

« What snould you see In your rear-view mir-

ror before you attempt to return to the right
i 2

« Under what condiions €an you pass a
vehicle on the right?

B you Vent
a crosswalk to allow a pedestrian to
Qo across?

B T 1g you

vehicle nassag van anthe lofi?

<WHhat do yelow nights gomg on and off on d
chool bus indicate?

school bus indicate?

42 | Driver's Manual

CHAPTER 7 / PARALLEL PARKING

Parallel parking takes skill and is part of every
road test. You must know where parking is illegal
and what NO PARKING, NO STANDING and NO
STOPPING signs indicate.

HOW TO PARK

Many motorists consider parallel parking the
most difficult part of driving. But practice will
teach you how to back up correctly and to judge
distances and angles.

Some vehicles have additional safety equip-
ment (such as back up cameras and range-de-
tecting sensors} to help the driver back up safely.
Some vehicles can even park themselves (in
certain conditions}. Although these can be useful
features, you need to be alert and check the area
behind your vehicle before you back up. YOU —
as the driver — are ultimately responsible for the
safe operation of your vehicle.

The following instructions are general. You must
adjust parallel-parking procedures to the particu-
lar situation. Practice is the only method to

learn correctly.

1. Select a space that is large enough for your ve-
hicle on your side of the road. Check your mirrors
before you stop and signal to warn other drivers.
Stop next to the vehicle in front of the space and
leave about two feet between the other vehicle
and your vehicle.

2. Look behind you over both shoulders to make
sure you will not interfere with pedestrians or on-
coming traffic. Back the vehicle slowly and begin

to turn your steering wheel completely toward the
near curb. Look through the rear window, not the
mirrors, when you back up. Look to the side and
front occasionally to make sure you will not touch
the vehicle ahead.

3. When your front wheels are opposite the back
bumper of the vehicle ahead, turn the steering
wheel the other way while you continue to back
up. Make sure you clear the vehicle ahead. Look
back and stop to ensure that you do not bump the
vehicle behind you.

4. Bring your wheels straight and pull forward. Al-
low room for the vehicles ahead and behind you.
In your final parking position, your wheels must be
no more than one foot (30 cm} from the curb.

To get nearer to the curb, alternately pull forward
and back up, and turn the steering wheel first
toward the curb and then quickly straight again.

After parking, remember that you must not open
the door on the road side if it will interfere with
bicyclists and other traffic.

HOW TO PARK ON A HILL

After you park on a hill, make sure to set your
parking brake. Put the transmission in “Park” (or,
if your vehicle has a manual transmission, put
the transmission into 1st gear). Turn the wheels
toward the curb or side of the road, so they will
keep your vehicle from heading into traffic.

HOW TO PULL OUT FROM PARALLEL
PARKING

To pull away from a parallel parking space, make
sure your wheels are straight, back up to the

vehicle behind you and turn your wheels away
from the curb.

Six steps to enter safely into traffic:

1} Turn your head to look over your right
shoulder and check through the rear-win-
dow for pedestrians, bicyclists, motorcyclists
and other vehicles that can become
a hazard;

2) Use your interior rear-view mirror to
help keep an eye on hazards behind
your vehicle;

3 Signal your intentions to move from your
parking space into traffic;

4} Check your side mirrors for oncoming vehi-
cles, pedestrians, bicyclists, in-line skaters,
motorcyclists and other highway users;

5} Turn your head to look over your left shoul-
der out through the rear-window and begin
to slowly drive forward. Make sure you can
avoid the vehicle parked ahead when you
enter traffic;

6) Turn your head and look over your left
shoulder to look through the rear-window,
drive into the traffic lane when it is safe
to do so.

PARKING REGULATIONS

What people understand as “parking” is legally
divided into three categories: parking, stand-
ing and stopping. Parking is when a vehicle is
stopped, occupied or not, other than temporarily
for the purpose of loading or unloading merchan-
dise or passengers. Standing is similar to Parking,
except that it only relates to receiving or discharg-
ing passengers. Stopping is literally that, bringing
the vehicle to a stop (even temporarily).

A NO PARKING sign means you can make a
temporary stop to load or discharge merchandise
or passengers.

A NO STANDING sign means you can only make
a temporary stop to load or discharge passen-
gers. The driver cannot exit the vehicle.

A NO STOPPING sign means you can stop only to

Driver's Manual | 43

obey a traffic sign, signal or officer or to prevent
conflicts with other vehicles.

Besides parking, standing and stopping rules,
there are statewide rules not always indicated
by signs:

You cannot park, stop or stand:

« Within 15 feet (5 m} of a fire hydrant, unless
a licensed driver remains in the vehicle to
move it in an emergency.

« On the road side of a parked vehicle
(“double parking”).

« On a sidewalk or in a crosswalk.

« In an intersection, unless permitted by signs
or parking meters.

«+ On railroad tracks.

« Next to or opposite road work, construction
or other obstructions if your vehicle
blocks traffic.

« Within 30 feet (10 m} of a pedestrian safety
area, unless another distance is marked.

+ On a bridge or in a tunnel.
Parking or standing is not allowed:
«In front of a driveway.

« Within 20 feet (6 m) of a crosswalk at
an intersection.

« Within 30 feet (10 m} of a traffic light, STOP
sign or YIELD sign.

« Within 20 feet (6 m} of a fire station driveway
or within 75 feet (23 m} on the opposite side
of the road.

« Along a curb that is cut, lowered or made for
access to the sidewalk.

You cannot park your vehicle within 50 feet
{15 m} of a railroad crossing.
44 | Driver's Manual

RESERVED PARKING FOR PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES

Parking reserved for persons with disabilities
is a legal requirement. These special parking
spaces for motorists with disabilities ensure safe
and equal access to goods and services, access
which is taken for granted by
many persons. You can park
in reserved spaces only if you
have a permit or vehicle plates
for persons with disabilities
and only when the person who
received the permit or vehicle
plates is in the vehicle.

——

RESERVED
PARKING

&

Itis illegal for any vehicle to
park, stop or stand in a space
reserved for the disabled unless it has vehicle
plates for the disabled issued by the DMV, a New
York State Parking Permit for the Disabled issued
by a city, town, county or village or a similar
vehicle plate or permit issued by another state.
The vehicle must be in operation to transport the
disabled person described in the registration or
permit. This law applies to spaces reserved and
provided by local ordinance on streets and high-
ways and those held for special use by state law
in shopping centers that have five or more stores
and 20 or more off-street public parking spaces.

It is a misdemeanor to make a false statement
or give false information on an application for
vehicle plates, and you would be subject to a
mandatory license revocation and could face a
fine, incarceration, or both, plus a mandatory
surcharge. Additionally, if you make a false state-
ment or provide false information to get a parking
permit for a person with a disability, you face
possible civil penalties from $250 to $1,000 and
a mandatory surcharge. These penalties apply
to the applicant and to a doctor who provides
certification.

To apply for vehicle plates for the disabled or
for a NYS Parking Permit for the Disabled use
the MV-664.1 Instructions and Application for a
Parking Permit or License Plates for People with
Severe Disabilities.

Reserved spaces must be marked with signs

like the one shown above, and also can be des-
ignated with pavement markings. Do not park in
the spaces with diagonal stripes next to reserved
parking areas. These spaces are needed to give
access to those with wheelchairs and vehicles
with special equipment.

The fines for parking violations on a street are
set by municipalities. Unless a municipality sets
higher penalties, the fine for a shopping center
violation is $50 to $75 for a first offense and $75
to $150 for a second offense within two years in
the same municipality. A mandatory surcharge of
$30 will be added to each penalty.

QUESTIONS

Before you go on to Chapter 8, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« After you have parallel parked, how near to
the curb must vour vehicle be?

+ May you open a door on the road side of
your vehicle if there is no oncoming traffic?

« Before you leave a parking space, what
should vou do?

« What does a NO STOPPING sign mean?

«Can you stop to 10ad or drop olf passengers
at a NO STANDING or NO PARKING sign?

+ Vlay you park on a crosswalk im
of a block?

€e mi e

APTER 8 / DEFENSIVE DRIVING

Most drivers are good drivers. But even the
best drivers make errors now and then. Equip-
ment fails, weather conditions can be bad, and
some drivers ignore traffic laws or drive in an
erratic manner. To prevent making errors or being
involved in a crash because of someone else’s
error, learn to drive in a defensive manner:

« Be prepared and look ahead.

« Maintain the correct speed.

« Signal before you turn or change lanes.
« Allow space.

« Wear your seat belt.

« Do not drive if you are very weary, are on
medication or have been drinking beverag-
es that contain alcohol.

« Keep your vehicle in good condition.

« Do not use hand held mobile devices
while driving.

BE PREPARED AND LOOK AHEAD

You should sit in a comfortable but vertical
position and keep both hands on the steering
wheel. Slouching in the driver's seat or using only
one hand on the wheel makes it more difficult or
even dangerous to control your vehicle.

Traffic conditions change continuously. Always
scan the road ahead. Do not use the road or even
the vehicle ahead as your only points of focus.
Look ahead so you can prevent, or decrease,
possible problems.

Keep your eyes moving, notice what is happen-
ing at the sides of the road, and check behind
you through your mirrors every few seconds.

Driver's Manual | 45

SAFE DRIVING TIPS

Anticipate errors by other drivers, bicyclists and
pedestrians and think about what you will do if
an error occurs. Do not assume that a driver who
approaches a STOP or YIELD sign on a side road
is actually going to stop or yield. It is better to
assume the other driver will not stop.

DRIVER DISTRACTIONS

A distraction is anything that takes your
attention away from driving. Distracted driving
can cause crashes, resulting in injury, death, or
property damage. Taking your eyes off the road
or hands off the steering wheel presents obvious
driving risks. Mental activities that take your mind
away from driving are just as dangerous.

When driving:
« Do not use cell phones or text.

« Avoid arguments and stressful or emotional
conversations with passengers.

« Avoid eating while driving.

« Be sure children are properly and
safely restrained.

« Properly secure pets in a pet carrier or por-
table kennel.

You must pay attention to the driving task. You
are responsible for operating your vehicle in a
safe manner.

AGGRESSIVE DRIVERS

Aggressive driving includes speeding, which
often leads to following too closely, frequent or
quick lane changes without a signal, passing on
the shoulder or parts of the roadway that are not
paved or being a nuisance to motorists, bicyclists
or pedestrians, who don’t get out of the way.
Aggressive drivers sometimes run stop signs and
46 | Driver's Manual

red lights, pass stopped school buses, fail to keep

right, drive while impaired by alcohol or drugs
and drive in a reckless manner. Some aggressive
drivers try to cause harm to another driver, and
that is how aggressive driving becomes

road rage.

To prevent road rage, it is sometimes better
not to make eye contact with another driver. The
other driver can take this as being challenged.

When an aggressive driver confronts you:
« Do not make eye contact.
« Remain calm and relaxed.
« Try to move away safely.

« Do not challenge an aggressive driver with
increased speed or try to hold your position
in your travel lane.

« Wear a seat belt and encourage your
passengers to do the same.

« Ignore gestures and shouts and do not
return them.

+ Report aggressive drivers to law enforce-
ment authorities and give a vehicle descrip-
tion, location, vehicle plate number and
direction of travel.

« If an aggressive driver is following you, do
not stop or get out of your vehicle. Drive to
the nearest police station.

« If an aggressive driver is involved in a crash,
stop a safe distance from the crash scene.
When the police arrive, report the driving
behavior you saw.

To avoid becoming an aggressive driver:

« Allow enough travel time to reach your
destination on schedule.

« Adjust your schedule to prevent driving
during times with the most highway traffic.
« If you are late, call ahead so you can relax.

« Do not drive when you are angry, upset or
very tired.

« Make your vehicle comfortable. Listen to
relaxing music and prevent conditions that
make you anxious.

+ When you drive, relax and be aware of how
you sit. Sit back in your seat, loosen your
hold on the steering wheel and do not grind
your teeth.

«+ Be polite, courteous and forgiving to
other drivers.

« You can control how you react. If another
person drives aggressively, do not do
the same.

If you have the right-of-way, do not think of
it as a complete right. Be prepared to yield the
right-of-way to other highway users. To wait a few
seconds for another driver is far better than to risk
a crash.

ROAD RAGE

What is “road rage”? Road rage is an angry,
hostile state, which can increase into violent
criminal actions or attempts of violent action that
result from the operation of a motor vehicle. Road
rage can include behavior to provoke others or to
make them fearful.

Aggressive driving is not road rage. Howev-
er, aggressive driving can become road rage.
Aggressive driving generally involves the violation
of a traffic safety law, while road rage involves the
breaking of a criminal law.

Who can become road raged? It could happen
to anyone when our irritation or anger with others
leads us to behavior that is a threat to ourselves
and to the safety and lives of others on and near
the road or highways. To endanger, threaten or
assault another person is illegal. These behaviors
can result in severe penalties that include fines,
imprisonment and court-ordered probation. They
can also result in revocation or suspension of a
driver license.
Road rage can include many behaviors, such as:

« Shouts, excessive use of a horn or obscene
gestures and threats.

« Driving actions like when you cut off another
vehicle, drive too closely, block another
vehicle so it cannot use a traffic lane, chase
another vehicle or run it off the road, or
deliberately slam into a vehicle.

+ When you stop a vehicle at the side of the
road, get out to threaten, attack, fight or
injure another motorist or passenger or a
pedestrian, bicyclist or other person.

Research indicates that being in a state of rage
can affect your blood pressure and your ability to
reason and make decisions. As a driver, you will
make more errors. The chance of being involved
in a traffic crash will increase.

Aggressive driving and road rage can lead to
revoked or suspended driver licenses, problems
between family members and friends, loss of
employment and legal problems.

Many drivers do not recognize when their own
aggressive driving or road rage is affecting their
ability to drive safely. State law requires every
DMV-approved accident prevention course to
address the hazards and dangers of road rage.
For information about DMV-approved accident
prevention courses, go to the DMV website at
https://dmv.ny.gov/learn-more-about/pirp. You
can also contact one of the program sponsors.
Information is available at any state or county
motor vehicle office.

SPEED

You must obey the speed limit. If no limit is
posted, drive no more than 55 mph (88 km/h}.
Often, it is common sense to keep your actual
speed below the posted limit. For example, the
legal limit on a slippery or fogged-in expressway
might be 55 mph (88 km/h}, or even 65 mph (100
km/h}, but the safe speed to drive would be much
lower. Even if you were to drive at 50 mph (80
km/h} on that hazardous highway, a police officer
could ticket you for a speed “not reasonable” for

Driver's Manual | 47

the conditions.

To keep a smooth traffic flow, some highways
also have minimum speed limits. If you drive slow-
er than the minimum speed you can interfere with
the traffic flow and create a dangerous condition.
Even if there is no minimum speed limit, those
driving too slow can be as dangerous as those
who drive too fast.

Know that some cities have speed limits less
than 55 mph (88 km/h} that are not always posted.
For example, the speed limit is 25 mph (48 km/h}
in New York City unless another limit is posted.

ALLOW YOURSELF SPACE

Four of every 10 crashes involve rear-end colli-
sions, normally because a person is following too
closely tailgating). Leave enough room between
your vehicle and the one ahead so you can stop
safely if the other vehicle stops suddenly. Brake
early and gently when you prepare to stop or turn.
It gives drivers behind you plenty of warning that
you plan to decrease your speed.

For a good “space cushion,” use the two-sec-
ond rule: Select an object near or above the road
ahead like a sign, tree or overpass. As the vehicle
ahead passes it, count slowly, “one thousand one,
one thousand two.” If you reach the same object
before you finish the count, you are following too
closely. In bad weather and when following large
trucks, increase the count to at least three or four
seconds for additional space.

If a driver follows you too closely {tailgates},
move to another lane if possible or reduce speed
and pull off the road to let the driver go by. Make
sure to signal when you drive off the road and
when you return to it. Do not press your brakes
suddenly or unnecessarily as this may startle the
motorist behind you and could escalate into
road rage.

In case you must change lanes quickly or pull
over to avoid a hazard, leave some “escape”
room to your left and right.
48 | Driver's Manual

SEAT BELTS, CHILD SAFETY SEATS
AND AIR BAGS

Seat belts save lives and can prevent serious
injuries in traffic crashes. This is why New York

State requires seat belt use by adults in motor ve-
hicles and seat belts, booster seats or child safety

seats for children.

New York is a “primary enforcement” state,
which means a police officer can pull you over

just because you or one of your passengers isn’t
wearing their seatbelt. A law enforcement officer
can issue a traffic ticket for failure to wear a seat
belt. This law also applies to visitors from outside

New York State.

Highlights of the New York State occupant
restraint law:

« The driver must be properly restrained by a
seat belt. The driver can face a fine of up to
$50 if they fail to buckle up.

« A passenger age sixteen (16} years of age or

older must be properly restrained by a seat
belt, one person per belt. A passenger age
sixteen (16) years of age or older can face a
fine of up to $50 if they fail to buckle up.

« The driver must make sure that each
passenger under the age of sixteen {16}
is properly restrained by a seat belt or

appropriate child restraint system. The driver

can face a fine of $25 to $100 and receive
three points on their driver license for each
violation.

A child under the age of four {4} must be
restrained in a federally approved child
safety seat (examples include infant only,
convertible, combination, all-in-one car seat}
that is attached to a vehicle by a safety belt or
universal anchorage (LATCH) system. A child
must be restrained in the rear-facing position
until they are two {2} years old or reach

the highest weight or height limit allowed

by the car seat manufacturer. For babies

that outgrow their infant-only car seat, itis
recommended that a convertible or all-in-one
seat be used in the rear facing position until

they outgrow the highest weight or height
limit allowed by the manufacturer for the rear
facing position.

+ A child between the age of four {4} and seven
(7) must be restrained in an appropriate
federally approved child restraint system
{commonly referred to as a booster seat} used
with lap and shoulder belt. An appropriate
child safety restraint system means the child
meets the size and weight recommendations
of the manufacturer. A vehicle's seat belts
are not defined as appropriate child restraint
systems under the law as they are not
designed for use by children.

All other passengers between the ages of
eight (8) and fifteen (15) must be properly
restrained by a seat belt, one person per
belt. If a child is eight {8} years old or older
and is under 4'9” tall or weighs less than 100
pounds, continued use of an appropriate child
restraint system is recommended. If the child
is four (4) years of age or older, but under the
age of eight (8) and is over 4'9” tall and/or
weighs more than 100 pounds, the child may
be restrained by a seat belt. If the seat belt
does not fit correctly, it is recommended that
the child continue to use an appropriate child
restraint system.

Exemptions: Seat belt use is not required in
certain emergency vehicles, 1964 or older
vehicles, by passengers in buses (except
school buses; but seat belt use in a school
bus can be required by a school district}, rural
letter carriers while discharging the duties

of such employment, passengers in taxi and
livery vehicles under the age of eight (8), and
passengers or operators with a physically
disabling condition that prevents them from
being restrained, provided that such condition
is duly certified by a physician.

When you drive, you must make sure each
person in your vehicle is properly restrained by
a seat belt, child restraint system, or car seat.
During a crash, a person not properly restrained
becomes a flying object and a danger to each
person in the vehicle.
« For added protection, adjust your vehicle
head rest, lock the doors and do not keep
loose, heavy objects in the passenger area.
Put them in the trunk.

Air bags are meant to work WITH seat belts,
not to replace them. An air bag protects a
front-seat occupant in a head-on crash by
inflating on impact and providing a cushion
so the occupant does not collide with the
steering wheel, dashboard or windshield.
The combination of a seat belt and an air
bag offers maximum protection, partly be-
cause they help the driver maintain control
of the vehicle and help prevent

secondary collisions.

«+ Air bags engage {expand quickly} from the
steering wheel and/or dashboard. Most adults
who are correctly fastened are safer in a
vehicle with air bags, but the pressure of an
air bag as it opens could injure those who sit
too close to it. You should sit with at least 10
inches between the center of your chest and
the cover of the air bag. Place your hands on
opposite sides of the steering wheel, at the 3
and 9 clock positions, to keep them away if
the air bag engages.

IMPORTANT: NEVER PUT AN INFANT IN A
REAR-FACING CHILD SAFETY SEAT

IN THE FRONT SEAT OF A VEHICLE THAT HAS
A PASSENGER AIR BAG.

HOW TO DRIVE SAFELY IN WORK ZONES

Areas where road work takes place are danger-
ous to drive in -- and to work in. That is why when
you speed in work zones, ticket fines double,
even when the workers or work vehicles are not
there. Expect to find a work zone wherever you
drive — you may have to decrease speed quickly
or even stop. Traffic lanes can shift or be com-
pletely closed. Workers and work vehicles can be
on or near your driving lane. When you drive in a
work zone, make it safer because you know what
to do.

Orange signs in the shape of diamonds --
“work zone” warning signs — are often placed
before road construction projects and other work

Driver's Manual | 49

areas that can change traffic flow. One sign can
read: “flagger ahead.” A flagger is a worker who
motions for you to stop, continue with caution or
change lanes. A flagger has the same authority as
a sign, which indicates you can receive a ticket for
disobeying their directions. Decrease speed! Be
Alert! Obey the signs!

Work Zone Tips:

+ Some signs can indicate a detour that allows
you to avoid the work zone. If you know
where a work zone is ahead, you should try
to use a different route.

As you enter a work zone, flashing signs or
signs with arrows or signs that warn “lane
closed ahead” mean you should merge
your vehicle into the correct lane when it is
safe. Do not speed to the end of the closed
lane and try to get into the other lane. If you
move to the correct lane at first notice, you
will drive in a calmer, more efficient, and
safe manner.

Decrease your speed when a sign indicates:
“Road Work 1,500 feet,” that means your car,
with a speed of 60 miles per hour, will get
there in 17 seconds.

« The rear-end collision is the most com-
mon crash in a work zone. To avoid being
involved in one, it helps to keep a braking
distance of two seconds or more between
you and the vehicle in front of you. (See
“Allowing Yourself Space,” earlier in this
chapter} Keep a safe distance between your
vehicle and traffic barriers, trucks, construc-
tion equipment and workers.

+ Some work zones are not stationary, like
when workers paint lines, patch roads or
mow. In these cases the size and/or location
of the work zones may change. As work pro-
gresses, the work zone size may increase,
decrease, or move to different sections of
the roadway. Workers can be close even if
you do not see them immediately after the
warning signs. Obey the signs until you pass
the one that states the work zone
has ended.
50 | Driver's Manual

HOW TO DRIVE THROUGH A
ROUNDABOUT

A “roundabout” is a round intersection with
a small diameter that makes drivers decrease
speed, normally to 30 mph or less. Studies
show a roundabout can reduce the number and
severity of accidents at an intersection, compared
to intersections controlled by stop signs or traffic
signals. Roundabouts, or rotaries, are now more
common in New York State and other states.

When using roundabouts or traffic circles:

+ As you get near the roundabout, look for
the street and direction signs you need. This
will help you know which exit to take. These
signs will be provided along the roadside
before you reach the entrance to the
roundabout. Slow down when you enter the
roundabout. A sign, like the one on the left
above, warns of a roundabout.

« When you arrive at the roundabout, yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrians and
bicyclists. You must also yield to any drivers
who were in the roundabout before you.
Sometimes a stop sign or traffic signal will
control your point of entry. When the traffic
level allows enough space and time, you
can enter the roundabout in a counterclock-
wise direction.

While inside the roundabout, remain in your
lane until you are ready to exit. Use your
right turn signal to let the other users know
your intention to move from the “inside
path” to the “outside path”, or if you are in
position to exit now. Start to signal at the
exit BEFORE the one you want to take. Do
not change lanes or take an exit before you
check for vehicles that may be continuing
through the roundabout in the lane next to
you or behind you. Expect vehicles to be in

the “blind spots” you cannot see in your mir-
rors. {For more about blind spots see, Large
Vehicles, Chapter 11.}

DROWSY AND FATIGUED DRIVING

Driving and sleep do not mix. When you are
behind the wheel of a car or truck, fatigue is
dangerous. If you are tired when driving you are
slower to react, and not as aware as you should
be and your judgment will be impaired. As with
drugs and alcohol, drowsiness can contribute to a
traffic crash.

Symptoms of Fatigue

Researchers have found the following symptoms
to be associated with drowsy driving:

« Your eyes close or go out of focus by them-
selves.

« You find it difficult to keep your head up.
« You continue to yawn.

« Your thoughts wander and are
disconnected.

« You do not remember driving the last
few miles.

« You drift between lanes, tailgate or miss
traffic signs.

« You must jerk the car back into the lane.

« You have drifted off the road and hit the
rumble strips, which produce a loud noise
and vibrations.

Who is Most at Risk? All Drivers who are:
+ Deprived of sleep or fatigued.
« Driving long distances without rest breaks.

« Driving through the night or at times when
you are normally asleep.

« Taking medication that increases sleepiness
or drinking alcohol.

« Driving alone.

« Driving on long, rural, or boring roads.
« Frequent travelers, e.g., business travelers
and long-distance commuters.

« Young People — Drowsy driving crashes are
most common for young people, who tend
to stay up late, sleep too little and drive
at night.

« Shift Workers — Drivers who have non-tradi-
tional work schedules have a greater risk of
being involved in a fatigue-related
traffic crash.

+ People With Undiagnosed Sleep Disorders —
The presence of a sleep disorder increases
the risk of crashes. If you find you are regu-
larly tired in the daytime or experience any
of these symptoms on a regular basis, you
may have a sleep disorder and should seek
medical help.

Effective Countermeasures

Prevention — Before you embark on a trip, you
should:

« Get enough sleep.

« Plan to drive long trips with a companion.

+ Schedule regular stops for every 100 miles
or two hours.

« Avoid alcohol and medications {over-the-
counter and prescribed) that may impair
performance. Check with your doctor or
pharmacist about any medication you are
taking. Alcohol interacts with fatigue,
increasing its effects.

«+ You are not at your best if you are ill or very
tired. Do not drive for at least 15 minutes
after waking from sleep.

Actions for the Drowsy Driver

if you suspect that you are drowsy when driving,
you must:
« Recognize that you are close to sleep and
cannot calculate when sleep may occur.

« Not depend on the radio, open window or
other “tricks” to keep you awake.

Driver’s Manual | 51

« Find a safe place to stop for a break in
response to symptoms of fatigue.

« Pull off into a safe area away from traffic and
take a brief nap (15 to 45 minutes}.

« Drink coffee or another source of caffeine to
promote short-term alertness if needed. (It
takes about 30 minutes for caffeine to enter
the bloodstream.)

NOTE: See Chapter 9 for more information about
the dangers of driving under the influence of
alcohol and other drugs.

USING A CELLULAR OR MOBILE
TELEPHONE

A driver can become distracted from safe
driving by use of a mobile telephone (like a
cellular telephone). In New York State, it is a traffic
infraction to speak into or listen to a hand-held
mobile telephone while driving. For a first offense,
you could be required to pay a fine up to $200
and receive five license points. The phone may
be hand-held to activate, begin, or end a call.
Exemptions are provided for calls for emergency
situations, for police and other law enforcement
officers and for fire department personnel and op-
erators of authorized emergency vehicles in the
performance of official duties. In New York State,
a hands-free mobile telephone allows the user to
communicate without the use of either hand. A
driver can use a hands-free telephone at any time.

Penalties for texting, electronic device use

In New York State, it is illegal to use portable
electronic devices, such as cell phones and
smart phones, to send or receive text messages
or e-mails while driving. The penalty for a first
offense is a fine of up to $200. A second offense
{both committed within 18 months} is a fine up to
$250. A third or subsequent offense (all commit-
ted within 18 months} is a fine up to $450. Also,
drivers with probationary and junior licenses who
use a hand-held phone or text while driving will
receive a 120-day suspension for a first conviction
and a revocation of at least one year for subse-
quent convictions within six months of the time a
license is restored after suspension.
52 | Driver's Manual

VEHICLE CONDITION

No person shall operate or park a vehicle on pub-
lic highways unless it has been inspected at least
once a year, but that does not mean it is the only
time you should have safety equipment checked.
Follow your owner's manual for routine mainte-
nance. Have problems corrected by a qualified
mechanic as soon as possible. Do not wait until
mechanical problems cause breakdowns

or crashes.

Pay special attention to the maintenance and
repair of the brakes, steering mechanism, lights,
tires and horn. Depend on your owner manual
and an experienced mechanic as keys to a safe
vehicle. It is the operator's responsibility to ensure
that the vehicle being driven is safe.

Here are some common problems, and some
equipment checks you can do:

BRAKES - Brakes that pull to one side may be wet
or may need to be adjusted or repaired. If wet,
you can dry them riding the pedal lightly. If this
does not help, have your brakes checked by a
mechanic. If you notice any change in the brake
performance, have them checked immediately.

STEERING - There should not be much free
movement in the steering wheel. If your vehicle
has power steering, check the fluid level periodi-
cally. A noise like a whine when you make a sharp
turn can indicate a problem.

LIGHTS - Keep your lights clean and free of dirt,
snow and ice. Broken lenses can cause danger-
ous glare for other drivers, so replace them as
soon as you can. Make sure headlights are adjust-
ed correctly to give you the best view of the road.

TIRES - The law requires that your tires have

at least 2432nds of an inch (16 cm} of tread. Most
tires for passenger cars and light trucks have
indicators called “wear bars” that show across the
tire grooves when the minimum tread depth is
reached. You can check your tread depth with a
penny. Hold a penny with Abraham Lincoln's body
between your thumb and forefinger. Place Lin-
coln’s head first into the deepest looking groove.
Can you see all of his head? If yes, your tires are
too worn — don’t drive on them, and make sure

to get them replaced. It is also illegal to drive with

tires that have cuts down to the cords, bumps or
bulges. Refer to your owner manual or a tire store
about correct tire pressure, and check it often
with a reliable gauge.

GLASS - Keep your windows clean and clear.
Replace worn wiper blades. Keep your defroster
and rear window defogger in good condition and
make sure there is enough windshield fluid in
the reservoir.

HORN - Your horn is important safety equipment
that could become your only means of warning
other drivers or pedestrians of possible problems.
If the horn does not work, get it repaired as soon
as possible. It should be used properly, not to
express anger at other drivers or pedestrians.

QUESTIONS

Before you move on to Chapter 9, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« Should you always look straight ahead when
you drive?

« If there is no posted speed limit, what is the
fastest you can legally drive in New York
City?

« [sit always safe to drive at the assigned
need limit?

« What is the purpose of minimum speed
limits?

« Who must wear seat belts? Who should
wear them?

+ What is road rage? How can you prevent
becoming involved in road rage?

«How should you drive sately
work zone? A roundabout?

Tougn a

CHAPTER 9 / ALCOHOL & OTHER DRUGS

You have probably heard the facts before -
driving while impaired or intoxicated is a serious
traffic safety problem in the United States. In New
York State, more than 40 percent of all motor
vehicle fatalities involve impaired driving. But the
facts and statistics do not tell the whole story.
Behind the numbers are thousands of lives cut
short, permanent or disabling injuries, and families
devastated because someone drove while under
the influence of alcohol or other drugs.

When you drink alcohol or take other drugs,
safe driving is not possible. Not every impaired or
intoxicated driver causes a traffic crash, but each
one is dangerous, putting their lives and those
they share the road with at risk.

Young people, who have less experience
with alcohol or drugs and less experience with
driving, are at high risk. Drivers under age 21are
approximately 4 percent of the driving population,
but 7 percent of the impaired drivers involved in
fatal crashes. This is one reason the driver license
revocation penalties are more severe for young
drivers who drive under the influence of alcohol
or other drugs.

Because driving “under the influence” is so
dangerous, the penalties for alcohol or drug-
related violations are tough and enforcement
is important. The chance of apprehension and
conviction are high and New York State law strictly
limits your ability to plea bargain when charged
with an offense related to alcohol or drugs.

WHAT ALCOHOL DOES

Alcohol delays your reaction time, reduces your
ability to see clearly, changes your judgment of
speed and distances, often makes you less inhib-
ited and makes you more prone to take chances.
The important skills you need to drive safely are
made weaker.

Because your vision is normally restricted at
night, it is especially dangerous to drink and drive
after dark. Alcohol also reduces your ability to re-
cover from the glare of headlights. When another

Driver's Manual | 53

vehicle moves toward you, you can be blinded by
its headlights for a long period of time.

You do not have to look or feel intoxicated
for these things to occur. The effects of alcohol
consumption can begin long before you become
intoxicated or even legally impaired and begin
with the first drink.

As alcohol physically limits your ability to drive,
it also makes you less aware of what is happening
to your safe driving abilities. It becomes difficult
for you to judge your condition. You can gain
confidence about driving, when you should not be
driving at all.

During each mile you drive, you make hundreds
of decisions. Your decisions turn into actions that
keep your vehicle controlled and ensure you
avoid crashes. Alcohol makes it difficult to make
correct decisions and to take the safest actions.

For example: You have just stopped ata STOP
sign. You see another vehicle approaching the
intersection. You must quickly make a decision
whether it is safe to go through the intersection.
Under the influence of alcohol, you are more like-
ly to make a wrong decision and “take a chance.”
Your slower reaction time, and the bad decision,
could cause a crash.

OTHER DRUGS

Drugs, which include many prescription and
over-the-counter medications, as well as illegal
substances, can affect your ability to drive. They
can have effects similar to alcohol or even worse.
If you take medication, even a remedy for colds or
allergies that is not prescribed, check the label for
warnings about its effects. If you are unsure, ask
your doctor or pharmacist about driving while on
the medication.

Never drink alcohol while you are taking other
drugs. It could be dangerous, often enhancing
the effects of the alcohol and the other drug.

For example, taking one drink while you are also
using a cold remedy could affect you as much as
several drinks.
54 | Driver's Manual

It can be a criminal offense to drive while
impaired by the effect of drugs, alcohol or the
combination of alcohol and drugs, including mari-
Jjuana/cannabis, and illegal drugs such as,
cocaine, LSD, heroin, opium and by some
prescription drugs. Drugs can detrimentally affect
your reflexes, judgment, vision and alertness and
they may have other dangerous effects as well.

A combination of alcohol and other drugs
severely reduces your ability to drive and can
cause serious health problems, which can
include death.

A combination of alcohol and other drugs se-

verely reduces your ability to drive and can cause
serious health problems, which can include death.

ALCOHOL, OTHER DRUGS AND THE LAW

In New York State, you can be arrested for
any of these offenses: aggravated driving while
intoxicated (Agg-DWI}, driving while intoxicated
(DWI), driving with a blood alcohol content of .08
percent or more {08 BAC), driving while ability im-
paired by a drug (DWAI-drug), driving while ability
impaired by alcohol (DWAI), or driving under the
combined influence of alcohol and drugs.

Blood alcohol content (BAC) is the percentage
of alcohol in your blood and is normally deter-
mined by a chemical test of breath, blood, urine
or saliva. A BAC of more than .05 percent is legal

5 oz. glass of wine
12% alcohol

12 oz. liquor
80 proof

evidence that you are impaired, a BAC of .08
percent or higher is evidence of intoxication, and
a BAC of 18 percent or more is evidence of aggra-
vated driving while intoxicated.

Many people think chemical test evidence is
required to prove you were intoxicated orim-
paired. However, the testimony of a police officer
about the way you drive, However, the testimony
of a police officer about the way you drive, and
your appearance and behavior while interacting
with and, behavior while interacting with the offi-
cer can provide enough evidence to convict you,
even without a chemical test.

If you are found guilty of any alcohol or drug-re-
lated violation, the court must revoke or suspend
your driver license when you are sentenced. Even
if the court allows you to continue driving for 20
days, your driver license will be taken immediately.

The BAC standards and penalties for commer-
cial drivers are even tougher than those indicated

in this chapter. For complete information, see Sec-
tion 1 of the Commercial Driver's Manual {CDL-10}.

YOUR BAC
Your (BAC) depends on:
« How much alcohol you drink.

« How much time passes between drinks.

12 0z. (360 ml)
can of beer
5% alcohol

12 oz. wine cooler
5% alcohol

« Your weight.

Your BAC does not depend on the type of bev-
erage you drink, how fit you are, or how you can
“hold your liquor.”

Different types of drinks do not affect you differ-
ently. It is the amount of alcohol you consume, not
whether it is in beer, wine or liquor that raises your
BAC and reduces your driving ability. These drinks
contain about the same amount of alcohol —1-12
ounces of liquor, 5 ounces of wine, 12 ounces of
beer, and 12 ounces of wine cooler. None is “safer
to drink” than the others.

For a 150-pound male, each one of these drinks
contains enough alcohol to increase his BAC by
about .02 percent. On average, it takes the body
approximately one hour to remove that much
alcohol. Studies indicate that a woman will take
longer to process and remove alcohol from the
blood. This can cause a higher BAC over a longer
period of time.

Compared to the 150-pound male described
above, your body weight can make some differ-
ence in the BAC and the effects of alcohol. No
one has immunity to the effects of alcohol. Itis a
simple fact: the more you drink in a given period
of time, the higher your BAC will be and the less
safely you will drive.

It takes only a few drinks to increase your BAC
to levels at which itis illegal to drive. And remem-
ber, the effects of alcohol on your ability to drive
begin at even lower BAC levels after just
one drink.

Eating before or while you drink helps slow the
absorption of alcohol somewhat, but it cannot
prevent intoxication or impairment if you have too
much to drink.

The only method to effectively reduce your
BAC is not to drink over a period of time. Coffee,
exercise and cold showers cannot reduce your
BAC and the effects of alcohol. They can help you
remain awake, but it cannot change your BAC or
make you sober.

Driver's Manual | 55

CHEMICAL TESTS

Chemical tests use blood, breath, urine or saliva
to measure the BAC of a person. If you are ar-
rested for an alcohol or drug related violation, the
police officer will likely request that you submit to
a chemical test (breath test analyzer}. Under New
York's “Implied Consent” law, when you drive a
car in this state you are considered to have given
your consent to take this type of test.

Chemical test refusal is a separate issue
from whether you were guilty of an alcohol or
drug-related violation. If you refuse to take the
test after being arrested, your driver license will
be suspended when you are arraigned in court
on the alcohol or other drug-related charge. In
addition, the fact that you refused a chemical test
can be brought up in court when you are tried
on the alcohol or drug-related charge. If a DMV
hearing later confirms you refused the test, your
driver license will be revoked even if you are
found not guilty of the alcohol or other drug-relat-
ed violation. For information about driver license
revocations and civil penalties for chemical test
refusals, see Chapter 2.

THE CONSEQUENCES

The table “Penalties for Alcohol/Drug Related
Violations” describes fines, surcharges, license
penalties and possible imprisonment if you are
convicted of an alcohol or drug-related violation.
Impaired or intoxicated driving can also have
other serious results.

Repeat Offenders

Drivers with repeat dangerous driving convic-
tions in New York State face one of the toughest
licensing policies in the nation. These regulations
call for:

« Lifetime Record Review by DMV: DMV will
review the lifetime record of all drivers who
apply to have a license reinstated after
a revocation.

+ Permanent License Denial for Persistently
Drunk & Dangerous Drivers: After con-
ducting a lifetime record review, DMV will
56 | Driver's Manual

deny any application for reinstatement of a
license after revocation if the applicant has:

« Five or more alcohol or drug related driving
convictions in his or her lifetime, or

Three or four alcohol or drug related driving
convictions in the 25 year look back period
plus at least one other serious driving
offense during that period. A serious driving
offense includes: a fatal crash, a driving-re-
lated penal law conviction, an accumulation
of 20 or more points assessed for driving
violations within the 25 year look back peri-
od or having two or more driving convictions
during the 25 year look back period each
worth five points or more.

Delayed Re-Licensing, Driving Restric-
tions, & Interlocks for Other Drivers with
Repeated Alcohol- or Drug-Related Driv-
ing Convictions: For those drivers seeking
reinstatement of a license after revocation
who have three or four alcohol- or drug-re-
lated driving convictions but no serious driv-
ing offense in the 25 year look back period,
DMV will:

Deny their applications for five years beyond
their statutory revocation period if the appli-
cant’s license was revoked for an alcohol- or
drug-related offense; or two additional years
if the applicant's license was revoked for

a reason other than an alcohol or drug
related offense;

Restore the applicant's license after that
additional period as a “restricted” license
limiting the applicant's driving to, for exam-
ple, travel to and from work or medical
visits; and

Require an interlock device on the vehicle
driven by the applicant for five years from

the date of issuance of the licensing docu-
ment. The interlock requirement applies to
those motorists who were approved after

the five-year waiting period.

« End the Reduction of Mandatory Suspen-
sion or Revocation Periods: Previously,
drunk drivers whose licenses have been

revoked or suspended twice within a
25-year period could get their full driving
privileges back in as little as seven weeks by
completing DMV’s Impaired Driver Program.
DMV'’s new regulations will ensure that
those drivers cannot obtain their driving
privileges until their full term of suspension
or revocation has ended.

Zero Tolerance for Drivers Under Age 21

The legal purchase and possession age for
beverages containing alcohol in New York State
is 21. Under the state's “zero tolerance” law, it
is a violation for a person under 21to drive with
any BAC that can be measured (02 to .07). After
a finding of violation is determined at a DMV
hearing, the driver license will be suspended for
six months. The driver then must pay a $100 sus-
pension termination fee and a $125 civil penalty
to be re-licensed. For a second Zero Tolerance
violation, the driver license will be revoked for
at least one year or until the driver reaches 21,
whichever is longer.

Illegal Purchase of Beverages
Containing Alcohol

When you use a driver license or Non-Driver ID
card as proof of age to illegally purchase bever-
ages that contain alcohol, state law requires the
suspension of your driver license or privilege to
apply for a license.

Open Container Law

It is a traffic infraction for a driver or passenger
in a motor vehicle on a public highway, street or
road to drink a beverage containing alcohol or to
possess an open container containing an alco-
holic beverage. It is also a traffic infraction for a
driver or passenger in a motor vehicle on a public
highway, street or road to consume marijuana/
cannabis. The penalty for a first conviction is a
fine up to $150, a mandatory surcharge, a crime
victim assistance fee, and possible imprisonment
of 15 days. Additional offenses within 18 months
bring higher penalties. The law exempts passen-
gers in vehicles like stretch limousines and other
vehicles that display a commerce certificate or
permit issued by the U.S. Department of Transpor-
tation or the NYS Department of Transportation.
Driver's Manual | 57

PENALTIES FOR ALCOHOL/DRUG RELATED VIOLATIONS

AGGRAVATED DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED

AGG-DWI (018 and higher Blood Alcohol Content [BAC])

CONVICTION FINE ONLY" JAIL SENTENCE REQUIRED
LICENSE ACTION"*

1 Offense Minimum $1000 Up to 1year Minimum 1Year

(Misdemeanor) Maximum $2500 Revocation

2m Offense Minimum $1000 Upto 4 years Minimum 18-Month

(Class E Felony) Maximum $5000 Revocation

Within 10 Years

DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED OR
DRIVING WHILE ABILITY IMPAIRED BY A DRUG

DWI (0.08 and higher Blood Alcohol Content [BAC]) or DWAI-Drug

CONVICTION FINE ONLY" JAIL SENTENCE REQUIRED
LICENSE ACTION"*

1 Offense Minimum $500 Up to 1year Minimum 6-Month

(Misdemeanor) Maximum $1000 Revocation DWI;

Minimum 6-Month
Suspension (DWAI-D)

2" Offense Minimum $1000 Up to 4 years (DWI & DWAI-D): Minimum 1-Year
(Class E Felony) Maximum $5000 minimum 5 days jail or 30 Revocation
Within 10 Years days of community service

(for DWI within prior 5 years)
DRIVING WHILE IMPAIRED BY COMBINED ALCOHOL & DRUGS

DWAI-Combination

CONVICTION FINE ONLY" JAIL SENTENCE REQUIRED
LICENSE ACTION"*

1 Offense Minimum $500 Up to 1year Minimum 6-Month

(Misdemeanor) Maximum $1000 Revocation

2m Offense Minimum $1000 Upto 4 years Minimum 1-Year

(Class E Felony) Maximum $5000 Revocation

Within 10 Years
DRIVING WHILE ABILITY IMPAIRED

DWAI (more than 0.05 up to 0.07 Blood Alcohol Content [BAC])

CONVICTION FINE ONLY" JAIL SENTENCE REQUIRED
LICENSE ACTION"*

1 Offense Minimum $300 Up to 15 Days 90 Day Suspension

(Traffic Infraction) Maximum $500

2m Offense Minimum $500 Up to 30 Days Minimum 6-Month

(Traffic Infraction) Maximum $750 Revocation

Within 5 Years

3 Offense Minimum $750 Up to 180 Days Minimum 6-Month

(Misdemeanor) Maximum $1500 Revocation

Within 10 Years

NOTE: Higher fines, longer jail sentences, and increased license penalties (including lifetime revocation) may result from a third or subsequent
conviction within 10 years. » *Conviction fine only, does not include mandatory surcharge or erime victims’ assistance fee.

**The Department of Motor Vehicle determines when your license can be returned. Its return or reinstatement, based on state law or regulation,
is not automatic. You must reapply for your license and may have to pass a test.

NOTE: License actions for those under age 21 are different.
58 | Driver's Manual

The Ignition Interlock Program and Leandra’s
Law

Courts must order all persons convicted of
driving while intoxicated or aggravated driving
while intoxicated, or of a penal law offense for
which an alcohol related violation of any provision
of section 1192 of the Vehicle & Traffic Law is
an essential element to install and maintain an
ignition interlock on any vehicle owned or oper-
ated by such driver for at least 12 months. (This
device, purchased and installed at the expense
of the motorist, is connected to a motor vehicle
ignition system and measures the alcohol content
of the breath of the driver. The vehicle cannot
be started until the driver provides an acceptable
sample breath.} The 12-month requirement may
be waived by the court if the defendant demon-
strates that the interlock device was installed for
at least six months, unless the court orders the
interlock device to be installed for a longer period
of time. The judge also must order an alcohol
assessment for a repeat offender. If the assess-
ment indicates alcohol treatment is necessary, the
judge may be required to order the completion of
treatment as a condition of probation.

Drivers who commit these alcohol-related
offenses with a child under 16 years old in the
vehicle may be charged with a class E felony,
punishable by up to four years in prison.

(This is known as Leandra’s Law.)

The law also makes it a felony to drive drunk
with a conditional license, which is a license that
may be issued by the DMV when someone is
convicted of an alcohol-related offense. Such a
license may be used only for driving to and from
essential destinations such as school, work and
medical appointments. The conditional driver
license will be revoked if the motorist does not
comply with the court terms or for a conviction for
any traffic offense except parking, stopping
or standing.

A FEW IMPORTANT REMINDERS

« If you kill or cause an injury to another
person because of an alcohol or other
drug-related violation, you can be convicted
of criminally negligent homicide, aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular manslaughter

or vehicular assault. These carry a fine of
thousands of dollars and can carry a maxi-
mum jail term of 25 years.

If you drive while your license is suspended
or revoked, you face a mandatory fine of
$200 to $1000 and a mandatory jail term or
probation. If impaired or intoxicated when
you are arrested, the maximum mandatory
fine is $5,000 and the vehicle can

be seized.

Liability insurance may not cover the cost of
injuries and damage from a traffic crash. You
could be sued for thousands of dollars and
you would find it difficult and expensive to
buy liability insurance for several years.

Besides fines and surcharges, you could
also face costly legal fees.

You could have a criminal record, which
makes it harder to get a job or move forward
in your job.

HOW TO AVOID TROUBLE

You are not likely to worry about the results of
your actions while you are impaired or intoxicat-
ed. The time to consider them, and how to
prevent them, is before you become impaired
or intoxicated.

« If you go to events with the same group of
friends, rotate drivers. Each friend takes a
turn being the “designated driver” who does
not drink any alcohol.

« Arrange to remain overnight or ride home
with a friend who does not drink.

« Before you drink, give your car keys to a
friend who does not drink and who will not
let you drive after you drink.

«+ Call a cab, or contact a Ride Share operator
or use public transportation.

« Drink slowly. Alternate between drinks with
alcohol and drinks without any alcohol.

« Do not consume (e.g. smoke, vape, eat, etc.)
marijuana/cannabis-based products
before driving.
+ Do not make alcohol the focus of your event

« If you have had too much alcohol, stop
drinking several hours before you intend
to leave so your body can begin to lower
your BAC

QUESTIONS

Before you move on to Chapter 10, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« How does impaired driving rank as a high-
way safety problem?

« What are the effects of alcohol on the skills
you need to drive?

« Which of TNese drugs could affect your
ability to drive: marijuana, a cold remedy,
atranguilizer?

« [T you take a non-prescription drug, what
ive?

« What is a likely effect when you take another
drug while you drink beverages
containing alcohol?

«On what three conditions does your
alcohol content (BAC) depend?

« WRICh of INESE contains more alcono
the other three: 1-2 ounces (30 ml} of liquor,

five ounces (120 ml} wine, 12 ounces (360 ml}
i ?

+ On average, how long does it take your
body to remove the alcohol contained in 12
ounces of beer?

« What is the only effective method to reduce
your BAC?

«What happens 10 your drver Icense 1 you

refuse a chemical test?

« Other than fines, action against your driver
license and a possible jail term, what are
some of the results when you drive under
the influence of alcohol or other drugs?

Driver's Manual | 59

CHAPTER 10 /SPECIAL DRIVING CONDITIONS

Even under the best conditions, driving requires
your full attention and your best judgment. When
special conditions or hazards occur, attention and
judgment become even more important. To be a
good and safe driver, you must learn how to drive
on expressways, at night, in bad weather and
when an emergency occurs.

RAILROAD CROSSINGS
GRADE CROSSINGS

A grade crossing is the point at which train
tracks intersect with a roadway and is considered
an intersection. As you approach a crossing,
always expect a train. Trains can run on any track,
at any time, from either direction. Never race a
train to a crossing, never drive around lowered
gates, and do not stop on tracks. {You will learn
later in the section what to do if your vehicle stalls
or gets stuck on a track.} When crossing tracks,
always stay in your lane and in the same gear.

Some grade crossings have flashing red lights
or lowering gates when a train approaches
(“active” grade crossings). When approaching
marked, or active, grade crossings, do not pro-
ceed until the gates are completely raised and
the lights are off. Itis illegal and dangerous to go
around lowered gates or to cross while the lights
are still flashing.

Some grade crossings do not have gates or
flashing lights. When approaching unmarked,
or passive, grade crossings, slow down and be
prepared to stop. Before you cross, be sure that a
train is not coming. If you see a train coming, wait
until it passes, and then cross the tracks when itis
safe to do so. If there are multiple tracks, wait until
you can clearly see down all sets of tracks in
both directions for another approaching train
before crossing.

Remember that the train you see is closer and
faster-moving than you think, and be aware that
trains cannot stop quickly.
60 | Driver's Manual

Railroad Crossing Warning Sign

COLOR: Yellow with black letters
“RR” and “X” symbol.

MEANING: There is a railroad
crossing ahead. Use caution, FN
and be prepared to stop. If you

are following a bus or truck

approaching a railroad crossing, be careful.
Most buses and some trucks must stop at
railroad crossings.

{See “Railroad Crossing Signals”.}
Railroad Crossing Signals

Flashing red
lights, lowered
crossing gates
and/or a bell ata
railroad crossing
indicate that you
must stop, at least LJ o ®
15 feet (5 m} from
the tracks. Do
not go across the
tracks until the
lights and bell have stopped and the crossing
gates are completely up. Do not drive around or
under a gate that is moving up or down.

Yield when you see a
crossbuck sign, which is a sign
shaped like an “X” with “RAIL-
ROAD CROSSING” printed on it
{like the sign above but without
flashing lights}. If there are
multiple train tracks, the sign
will show the number of tracks.

Look and listen for trains
before crossing any railroad
tracks. If an approaching train
is near enough or going fast
enough to be a danger, you
cannot go across the tracks,
even if they have no signals or
the signals are not working.

Do not under any circumstances, attempt to
cross any railroad tracks unless you are certain
your entire vehicle will clear all of the tracks at
the crossing. You cannot go across any railroad
tracks unless there is room for your vehicle on the
other side. If other traffic prevents you from going
fully across, wait and go across only when there
is room.

School buses with or without passengers, other
buses with passengers on board and vehicles
with explosives or flammable cargo must stop at
all railroad crossings. Remember those rules if
you are following one of these vehicles.

Pavement Markings

Sometimes, grade crossings do
not have flashing red light signals
or gates. Pavement markings
will often show you that a grade
crossing is ahead. Stay behind R R
the stop line while waiting for a
train to pass.

Stalling on Railroad Tracks

What should you do if you
stall on the tracks, for any
reason?

REPORT EMERGENCY
OR PROBLEM

TO 1-800-555-5555
CROSSING 836 597 H

1. GET OUT! {That
includes EVERYONE
in the car, children, babies, an elderly
passenger, etc.)

2. Get away from the tracks, even if you do
not see a train.

3. Locate the Emergency Notification System
sign and call the number provided, telling
them about the stalled vehicle.

Run toward the general direction the train is
coming from. If a train is approaching, run toward
the train but away from the tracks at a 45-degree
angle. If you run “down the track,” in the same
direction as the train, you can be hit with debris
when the train hits your vehicle.
EXPRESSWAY DRIVING

“Expressway” means any divided highway
where traffic moves in one direction on two
or more lanes. You normally enter or exit the
expressway on ramps {controlled-access). The
speed limit is normally 55 mph (88 km/h}, but can
be posted at 65 mph (100 km/h} in some rural
areas. Examples of expressways are the New
York State Thruway, major interstate routes and
parkways.

[T—
uy
[mot

Before you travel on an expressway, identify
your entrance and exit points on a road map.
Know where to get on and off the expressway
and be prepared to get into the correct lanes for
your entrance and exit. If you enter an express-
way going a different direction than you intended,
or at the wrong exit, stay on the expressway
until the next exit. After you exit the expressway,
you can figure out where you need to go and
(if necessary} get back on the expressway. IT IS
DANGEROUS to back up on an entrance or exit
ramp, or to try to cross a median.

Unless there is a STOP or YIELD sign or traffic
light on the entrance ramp, use the ramp to accel-
erate to expressway speed and blend with traffic.
Signal, then look over your shoulder for traffic
already on the expressway. If necessary, slow
down to safely merge into traffic.

If the entrance lane is too short to allow accel-
eration to expressway speed, the safest method
to enter is to stop and wait for a large space in
traffic. Then enter the expressway and accelerate
quickly. To avoid conflicts with other entrance
lane traffic, stop when necessary and merge into
expressway traffic as soon as possible.

As you drive on the expressway, make sure
to signal all lane changes and check over your
shoulder to make sure you will not cut off any
vehicles behind you. Make sure your directional
signal goes off after you change lanes.

Driver's Manual | 61

Remain alert for traffic that enters ahead. If
possible, move from the right lane when you
approach the entrances to allow more room for
traffic entering the expressway from the ramp.

To prevent a last-minute lane change, check the
destination and exit signs and get into the correct
lane for your exit ahead of time. Make sure to
signal your exit at least 100 feet (30 m) before
you reach the exit ramp. When you are on the
exit ramp, decrease your speed. There is often a
lower speed limit for the ramp.

After you leave an expressway, look for speed
limit signs and check your speedometer to be
sure you are within the posted limit. You are not
likely to be on a 55 mph {88 km/h} road.

Expressway driving normally combines higher
speeds with heavy traffic. The higher speed and
amount of traffic require you to think faster and
handle your vehicle in a more efficient manner
than in most other conditions. On long trips, plan
frequent rest stops. On a bright day, sunglasses
can reduce glare and eye fatigue.

-- mm

NIGHT DRIVING

About 90% of your decisions are based on what
you see. At night, you must use extra caution to
make up for reduced visibility. You should also
know that the ability to see well at night decreas-
es with age.

Night driving is more dangerous because the
distance you can see ahead or to the side is
reduced. You should drive slower than you would
in daylight, especially in areas that are not known
or on narrow roads with many curves. Your head-
lights cover about 350 feet ahead. It is important
that you drive at a speed that allows you to stop
safely within that distance. This is called “driving
within the range” of your headlights.
62 | Driver's Manual

The law requires you to use your headlights
from one-half hour after the sun sets to one-half
hour before the sun rises, when visibility is less
than 1,000 feet {300 m} and when you use your
windshield wipers to clear rain, snow or sleet.
Turn your headlights on at dawn, dusk and in
fog. Even when headlights do not help you see
in low-light periods, they make it easier for other
drivers and pedestrians to see your vehicle. Do
not use parking lights or daytime running lights as
a replacement. Headlights do a better job. If an
oncoming driver flashes headlights at you during
a period of low visibility, it means your vehicle
was difficult to see and you should turn on your
headlights.

Be considerate when you use your high beams.
Your headlights must be on low beam when you
are within 500 feet (150 m} of an oncoming vehicle
or within 200 feet (60 m} of a vehicle ahead of
you, even if the vehicle ahead is in a different lane.
You should also dim your lights for pedestrians
who approach you. Any fog or driving lights your
vehicle has must be arranged, adjusted or operat-
ed to avoid dangerous glare to other drivers.

If an approaching driver does not dim the
headlights, flash your headlights to high beam for
a second, then return to low beam. To help avoid
the glare of approaching high beams, move your
eyes to the right. Use the road edge as a guide
until the approaching vehicle passes by.

To reduce glare from the lights of following
vehicles, switch your inside rear view mirror to the
“night” position.

Light from inside your vehicle or from street
lights makes it harder for you to see the road
ahead. Keep the interior roof light off and dim the
dashboard lights. Adjust your visors to reduce
glare from lights from above.

A dirty windshield increases glare from ap-

proaching headlights. Make sure your lights and
windshield glass are clean for night driving.

DRIVING IN RAIN, FOG OR SNOW

A bit of rain, snow or ice makes roads slip-
pery. Wet leaves can be slippery and hazardous.

Reduced speed and increased following distance
improve your safety under these conditions (see
Chapter 8). Take additional care on curves, turns
and expressway ramps.

In heavy rain, your tires can begin to ride on
the water that is on top of the road pavement.
This is called “hydroplaning” and can cause
complete loss of traction and control of steering.
Hydroplaning normally occurs at higher speeds,
but it also can occur if your tires are tread worn or
not inflated properly. When there is heavy rain, it
always makes sense to drive more slowly. If your
vehicle begins to lose traction, decrease your
speed even more. Good tires with deep tread
help to prevent hydroplaning.

Rain, fog or snow make it harder to see through
your windshield, and difficult for other drivers to
see you. New York State law requires you to turn
on your headlights when the weather conditions
require the use of windshield wipers to clear rain,
snow, sleet or fog. “Daytime running lights” do not
qualify as headlights.

Headlights on high beams reflect rain, fog and
snow as it falls. This makes it even harder for you
to see. For better visibility during these weather
conditions, keep your headlights on low beam.
Reduce your speed. Signal your turns further
ahead of time to give other drivers and roadway
users more warning. Brake early when you
decrease speed behind another vehicle or come
to an intersection stop.

Some vehicles have front fog lights or front
and back fog lights, for use when heavy fog or
similar hazardous weather conditions restrict
visibility. In New York State, all fog lights must be
correctly installed and of a type approved by the
Commissioner of DMV. Front fog lights can be
amber or white in color. Back fog lights must be
red and can be larger than the normal back lights
- they will give advance warning of the presence
of your vehicle to the drivers behind you. When
visibility improves, you can switch off your fog
lights to reduce the glare that can bother
other drivers.

HOW TO DRIVE IN WINTER

Winter is the most difficult season in which to
there are fewer hours of daylight.

Before winter weather arrives, make sure your
vehicle is in good condition. Make sure your
vehicle has good snow tires. Put them on the
vehicle before the first storm. Never combine
radial and non-radial tires on the same vehicle.
Tires with metal studs can be used in New York
State only from October 16 through April 30.

During ice or snow storms, do not drive unless
you must. If you must drive, first clear the ice
and snow from your vehicle. This includes the
headlights and back lights, the windshield wipers,
the hood and roof of your vehicle, and all of
the windows. Make sure the windshield washer
reservoir is filled with a cleaning solution that
resists freezing.

Drive slowly. Even if your vehicle has good
traction in ice and snow, other drivers will travel
with caution. Do not break the flow of traffic by
driving faster than other vehicles.

In a rear-wheel drive vehicle, you can normally
feel a loss of traction or the start of a slide. With
a front-wheel drive vehicle, there might not be
a warning. Although front-wheel drive and four-
wheel drive vehicles normally handle better in
ice and snow, they do not have flawless traction;
skids can occur without a warning. Do not let the
ability to better handle a front-wheel or four-wheel
vehicle make you drive faster than the conditions
dictate.

The best method to recover from a skid is the
same for all vehicles.

If your rear wheels start to skid:

« Turn the steering wheel in the direction the
vehicle is trying to go. If your rear wheels
slide left, steer left. If they slide right,
steer right.

« If your rear wheels start to slide in the other
direction as you recover, turn the steering
wheel toward that side. You might have to
turn the wheel left and right several times to
get your vehicle completely controlled.

« If your vehicle has anti-lock brakes (ABS),

Driver's Manual | 63

keep your foot with even pressure on the
brake pedal. If your vehicle does not have
ABS, pump the pedal carefully. Pump more
rapidly only as your car slows down. If you
brake hard with regular brakes, it will make
the situation worse.

If your front wheels skid:

« Take your foot off the gas and shift to neutral
or push in the clutch, but do not try to
immediately steer.

« As the wheels skid sideways, they will slow
the vehicle and traction will return. As trac-
tion returns, turn the wheel in the direction
you want to go. Then put the transmission
in “drive” or release the clutch and
accelerate carefully.

To prevent skids on snow and ice, brake early,
carefully and gently. “Press” your brakes in slow,
steady strokes. Allow the wheels to keep turning.
If they begin to lock, decrease pressure on the
brake pedal. As your vehicle decreases speed,
you can also shift into a lower gear.

When sleet, freezing rain or snow begin to fall,
remember that bridges, ramps and overpasses will

freeze first. Also know that slippery spots may re-
main after road workers have removed the snow.

Tssse™

HOW TO AVOID COLLISIONS WITH DEER

Two-thirds of all deer-vehicle collisions occur
during the months of October, November and
December. This is also the time when deer breed
and when they travel the most. Daily deer activity
is highest at dawn and dusk, which often is the
highest time of travel for motor-vehicle com-
muters. Deer travel in groups — if you see one,
expect more. Areas where there have been many
deer-vehicle collisions often are marked with
64 | Driver's Manual

deer crossing signs. The New York State Depart-
ment of Environmental Conservation recommends
these precautions motorists can take to reduce
the chance of a deer hit:

« Be careful when you drive at dawn and
dusk; this is when driver visibility is bad and
the deer are most active.

« The risk of deer-vehicle collisions increases
when deer movements increase during
breeding season in October, November
and December.

« Decrease speed when you approach deer
near roadsides. Deer can “bolt” or change
direction at the last minute.

« If you see a deer go across the road, de-
crease speed and be careful. Deer travel in
groups, expect other deer to follow.

« Use emergency lights or flash your head-
lights to warn other drivers when deer are
seen on or near the road.

« Use caution on roadways marked with deer
crossing signs. These signs are put in areas
that have had a large number of deer-
vehicle collisions.

DRIVING EMERGENCIES

The most important rule in any emergency is
do not panic. You have a better chance in an
emergency if you do not let fear take over. In most
emergencies, you will have a second or two to
think before you act.

Here is what to do in different emergency
situations:

TIRE BLOWOUT - A thumping sound can be a
warning that a blowout is about to occur. If you
hear it, get safely off the road and check your
tires. If a tire blows out, hold the steering wheel
tightly and slowly take your foot off the gas pedal.
If your vehicle skids, handle it as you would on ice
or snow. Do not use your brake until your vehicle
is controlled. Leave the road when it is safe to

do so.

LOSS OF A WHEEL - Handle this as you would

a blowout. A thump or noise in the wheel can be
a warning sound. Leave the roadway and stop.
Then check your vehicle or have it checked.

STEERING FAILURE - If your vehicle suddenly will
not respond when you steer, slowly take your foot
off the gas pedal, turn on your emergency lights
and keep your foot off the brake pedal while it is
safe to do so. The balance of the vehicle will allow
it to continue going straight, but a sudden change
in speed could send it out of control. As the vehi-
cle decreases speed, you can brake very carefully
to bring it to a stop.

BRAKE FAILURE - If your brake pedal suddenly
goes to the floor, try pumping it to increase pres-
sure. If that does not help, use your emergency
if you can apply it gradually- but use it gently. If
you shift to a lower gear, it will help your vehicle
decrease speed.

HEADLIGHT FAILURE - If your headlights sudden-
ly go out, try your emergency lights, parking lights
and directional signals. These may continue to
work and can give you enough light to leave the
roadway safely. If your headlights begin to dim,
drive to a service station or pull off the road and
go for help.

STUCK GAS PEDAL - Hook your shoe under the
pedal and see if you can free it. If not, shift into
neutral and use the brake to slow your vehicle
and get off the road. Do not turn of the ignition as
you could loose your steering control or or lock
your steering wheel.

RUNNING OFF THE PAVEMENT - If your wheels
move off the pavement, do not suddenly steer or
swerve back onto the pavement. Ease your foot
off the gas pedal and brake gently. When your
vehicle has decreased speed, check for traffic
behind you, then turn carefully back onto

the pavement.

VEHICLE APPROACHING HEAD-ON IN YOUR
LANE — Decrease speed, pull over to the right
and sound your horn to warn the other driver.
Do not turn into the left lane. If you do, the other
driver may suddenly recover and pull back into
that lane, causing a head-on collision.
STALLING ON RAILROAD TRACKS - If a train
approaches, release your seat belt, leave the
vehicle and get as far away as you can from the
tracks. Run toward the general direction the train
is coming from. If you run “down the track” in the
same direction as the train, you can be hit with
debris when the train hits your vehicle. When you
are completely sure no trains are coming, open
your window to listen for a train and try to start the
engine. If that fails, shift your vehicle into neutral
and push it from the tracks.

GOING INTO WATER - A vehicle will normally
float for a while, and you should have time to
remove yourself before it starts to sink. Release
your seat belt and escape through a window. An
open door would cause water to rush in and the
car could turn over on top of you.

If the vehicle sinks before you can remove
yourself, get into the back seat. An air pocket can
form there as the weight of the engine pulls the
vehicle down front first. When the vehicle settles,
take a breath and escape through a window.
When you rise air pressure will build in your lungs.
Let it out in small breaths through your nose or
lips as you surface. Do not hold your breath tight
or try to blow air out; just allow the air to escape in
a natural way.

FIRE - If you see smoke come from under the
hood, pull off the road and park your vehicle. Turn
off the ignition. Get away from the car and call the
fire department. It is dangerous to try to fight the
fire yourself.

BLOCKED VISION - If your hood opens suddenly
or your vision through the windshield becomes
blocked by some other object or wipers that have
failed, you can open the side window so you can
see. Turn on your emergency lights and carefully
pull your vehicle off the road and park it.

QUESTIONS

Before you go on to Chapter 11, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« What should you do if you miss an
expressway exit?

Driver's Manual | 65

« What are expressway entrance ramps
used for?

« What should you do if an entrance ramp
is short?

« When should you signal that you are exiting
an expressway?

« What should you Check Tor when you leave
an expressway?

« WRY 1S expressway driving amerent rom
normal driving?

« What is the main reason night driving is

more difficult than davtime driving?

« Driving within the range of your headlights
indicates you can stop your vehicle within
about how many feet?

« What should you do If you are blinded by
i i icle?

«Is it best to keep your headlights on high
beam or low beam when there is fog, rain or
falling snow?

« Which direction should you turn your steer-
ing wheel to get out of a skid?

« How should you use your brake pedal on a
slippery road?

«Whats the most important rule to remember

in any emergency?

« What should you do if one of your tires
blows out?

« Whats the first thing you should do if your
brakes fail?

+ What should you do if your wheels move o
the pavement?

66 | Driver's Manual

CHAPTER 11 /SHARING THE ROAD

As a driver, you must learn to safely share the
road with a variety of other users. These include,
but are not limited to: large vehicles, motorcycles,
mopeds, pedestrians, bicyclists, in-line skat-
ers, roller skaters, skateboarders, slow moving
vehicles, non-motorized scooters and horseback
riders. You should know how to safely manage
the problems they can present and understand
the special rules they must obey.

PEDESTRIANS

Pedestrians are at high risk in traffic. The law
requires you to be extra careful to avoid a colli-
sion with them.

Look out for children, near schools, bus stops,
playgrounds, parks and ice cream trucks.

When you back up your car or truck, look
through your back window for pedestrians. Do
not rely only on mirrors when children are near.
Before you back into a driveway, or out of it, get
out of the vehicle and check behind your vehicle.

Pedestrians are supposed to walk on the side
of the road and face the traffic in the lane nearest
them. When you make a right turn, watch for
those pedestrians on your right. When you make
a left turn, watch for pedestrians on the other side
of the road on your left.

Pedestrians are supposed to walk on the side
of the road and face the traffic in the lane nearest
them. When you make a right turn watch for
pedestrians on your right. When you make a left
turn, watch for pedestrians on the other side of
the road on your left.

A special right-of-way law allows blind pedes-
trians to go across the road with a guide dog ora
white or metal cane. You must always give them
the right-of-way when they are trying to cross at a
marked or unmarked crosswalk even if the traffic
signals or other right-of-way rules are not in
their favor.

Remember to move your eyes as you drive.
Look to either side every few seconds to help
you spot pedestrians near or approaching
the roadway.

The law requires pedestrians to:

« Obey traffic and pedestrian signals, traffic
officers and official signs.

«+ Use the sidewalk when available or face traf-
fic as they walk, as far from the near traffic
lane as possible.

« Never stand in the road to hitchhike or
conduct business with motorists.

Tips for Drivers:
«+ Be alert: Always watch for pedestrians.
« Make sure the pedestrian sees you!

« Scan the road and the sides of the road
ahead for pedestrians.

« Do not expect a pedestrian to always follow
the rules of the road and expect that a
pedestrian may be entering the roadway
at anytime, anywhere, including outside of
crosswalks. Expect the unexpected.

« Before making a turn, look in all directions
for pedestrians crossing. Then look
again. Particularly, left turns can be a very
dangerous maneuver for a motor vehicle
driver.

« For example, > 35% of the NYC pedestrian
injury crashes occur when a driver is
attempting to make a left turn.

« Don’t drive after consuming alcohol or other
drugs, or when you are fatigued.

« Do not use your cell phone or text
while driving.

« Do not use portable electronic devices,
headphones or do any other activity that will
distract you.
«+ Look carefully behind your vehicle for
approaching pedestrians, especially small
children, before backing up.

« For maximum visibility, keep your windshield
clean and headlights on.

«+ Be responsible: Pedestrians have the right of
way at all crosswalks. Yield to pedestrians
at all crosswalks and intersections, whether
marked or unmarked.

+ When there is no traffic control signal,
drivers must yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians, particularly if a pedestrian is in
a crosswalk, or there is potential danger to
the pedestrian.

« Every driver approaching an intersection
or crosswalk must yield the right-of-way to
a pedestrian.

Drivers may be issued a tickets if they are
involved in a crash with a pedestrian, injure
a pedestrian/bicyclist or fail to exercise
due care.

« Stop well back from the crossing to give
other vehicles an opportunity to see the
crossing pedestrians so they can stop too.

Yield to pedestrians when making right or
left turns at intersections.

« Expect that someone may be entering the
roadway or crossing the street that may not
see or hear you — expect that there may
be persons with disabilities who may have
hearing, sight or mobility challenges in and
around crossings.

« Pay particular attention to pedestrians
accompanied by a guide dog, using a white
cane or other mobility assistive devices.

« Use extra caution when driving near children

playing along the street or older pedestrians.

« Do not block or park in crosswalks.

Driver's Manual | 67

« Always stop for a school bus with flashing
red lights. Never pass or overtake a vehicle
that is stopped for pedestrians.

There may be people crossing where you
can't see.

« Obey speed limits and come to a complete
stop at STOP signs.

« Use extra caution when driving in hard-to-
see conditions, such as nighttime or
bad weather.

«+ Slow down and be prepared to stop when
turning or otherwise entering a crosswalk.

« Be extra cautious when backing-up and look
for pedestrians.

« Be aware of your vehicle's a-pillars {vertical
supports on the vehicle that are located
around all glass) as these may interfere with
seeing clearly {they can create blind spots!)

« Never pass vehicles stopped at a crosswalk.
There may be people crossing where you
can't see.

« Follow the speed limit, especially around
people on the street, in school zones, in
neighborhoods where children are present
and as you approach an intersection.

BICYCLISTS

Bicyclists have the right to share the road and
travel in the same direction as motor vehicles.
They are often hard to see in traffic and have no
protection from a traffic crash. Check your “blind
spots” before you make a turn, parallel park, open
a door or leave a curb. Do not depend only on
your mirrors — turn your head to look for bicyclists,
skaters and scooter operators that may be next to
you or approaching.

Give bicyclists room when you drive. Reduce
speed as you pass them. Air pressure from a
vehicle that passes them quickly can send them
off balance.
68 | Driver's Manual

Be aware that the bicyclist near or in front of
you can react to road hazards like a motorcyclist
would with sudden changes of speed, direction
or lane position.

Bicyclists must:

« Ride in a bicycle lane, if available. Where
there is none, they must remain near the
right curb or edge of the road or on a right
shoulder of the road, to prevent interference
with other traffic. When they prepare for a
left turn or must move left to avoid hazards,
cyclists do not have to remain to the right.

« Come to a full stop before they enter a road-
way from a driveway, an alley or over a curb.

« Never travel with more than two side-by-
side in a single lane.

« Never ride on a sidewalk if it is prohibited by
local laws.

Bicyclists and their passengers ages 1-13, must
wear an approved helmet. Adults must obey any
local laws or regulations about helmet use.

Bicyclists also must:

« Signal turns, lane changes and stops
through the use of the hand signals shown.
A bicyclist can signal a right turn when they
extend the right arm straight out to the right.

« Never carry an infant under a year old as
a passenger. It is against the law. Child
passengers ages 1-4 must ride in attached
bicycle safety seats.

« Never carry a passenger unless the bicycle
has a passenger seat.

« Keep at least one hand on the handlebars
at all times and do not carry any item which
prevents correct control of the bicycle.

« Any bicycle crash that causes death or seri-
ous injury must be reported to DMV within
10 days of the incident. Bicycle accident
report forms (MV-104C} are available at any
motor vehicle office.

A bicycle driven on public highways must have
adequate brakes and a horn or bell that can be
heard at least 100 feet (30 m} away. A bicycle
used at night must have a headlight visible from
at least 500 feet {150 m} ahead and a red taillight
visible from at least 300 feet (90 m) behind. One
of these lights must be visible from at least 200
feet (60 m) away on each side. A bicycle sold by
a dealer must have wide-angle, spoke-mounted
reflectors or reflective tires, a wide-angle rear
reflector and pedal reflectors.

The rules of the road and right-of-way apply to
and protect these and other highway users. You
must yield the right-of-way to them just as you
would to another vehicle. And they must obey the
rules of the road just as motor vehicle drivers do.

= errrunn [mont ronn | 5

 — OR...
"Ee

Tips for Drivers:

« People on bicycles have the same rights and
responsibilities as people behind the wheel
of a motor vehicle.

« Drivers must be alert to the presence of
bicyclists and drive responsibly to avoid
colliding with them or encroaching on their
rightful path of travel.

« Yield to bicyclists as you would other drivers
and do not underestimate their speed. This
will help avoid turning in front of a bicyclist
traveling on the road or sidewalk, often at an
intersection or driveway.

« Give bicyclists extra space.

« Make sure bicyclists see you.

« In parking lots, at stop signs, when backing
up, when parking, and before opening your

door, search your surroundings for people,
bicycles and other vehicles.
« Learn to recognize common hand signals
used by bicyclists to indicate right and left
turns and stopping.

« Drivers turning right on red should look
to the right and behind to avoid hitting a
bicyclist approaching from the right rear.
Stop completely and look left-right-left and
behind before turning right on red.

« Obey the speed limit, reduce speed for road
conditions and drive defensively to avoid a
crash with a cyclist.

« Give cyclists room. Do not pass too closely.
Pass bicyclists as you would any other
vehicle—when it's safe to move over into
an adjacent lane. Look before getting out
of your parked vehicle; avoid opening your
door into the path of an oncoming bicyclist.

« When passing, reduce speed. Air pressure
from your vehicle can send them
off balance.

+ Be aware that the bicyclist near or in front
of you can react to road hazards like a
motorcyclist would with sudden changes
of speed, direction, or lane position.

« Learn to recognize designated bicycle
lanes, bike boxes, 2-way cycle tracks, green
painted cycle lanes and other roadway
modifications designed for bicyclists to
operate safely and efficiently. Drivers are
prohibited from operating in these dedicated
spaces and must be aware of how bicyclists
operate in and around these spaces.

«+ Bicycle lane — a marked lane dedicated for
use by bicycles.

« 2-way cycle track — a marked bicycle lane
that allows travel in both directions, similar
to a sidewalk for pedestrians.

« Bike Box —a marked area at an intersection,
ahead of where traffic is required to stop.
This area provides extra space for bicyclists.
Some bike boxes extend across the entire
intersection and function similar to a
crosswalk for pedestrians.

Driver's Manual | 69

« Green painted bike lanes are used to
increase visibility to cyclists in some high
traffic areas.

The rules of the road and right-of-way apply to
and protect bicyclists and other roadway users.
You must yield the right-of-way to them just as
you would to another vehicle. Bicyclists must also
obey the rules of the road the same as a motor
vehicle driver but as a driver you must anticipate
that they will not follow the rules of the road.

IN-LINE SKATERS, SKATE BOARDERS
AND NON-MOTORIZED SCOOTERS

As with pedestrians and bicyclists, other road
users such as in-line skaters, skateboarders and
non-motorized scooters are vulnerable to the
careless actions of motor vehicle drivers. Motor
vehicle operators are responsible for safe and
lawful operation of the vehicles they drive. Itis
important for you, as a driver, to do everything
possible to respect the safety of all road users,
including in-line skaters, skateboarders and
non-motorized scooters. You as the driver are
responsible to exercise due care by being aware,
alert, and driving defensively.

Just as you would when keeping an eye out for
pedestrians and bicyclists, pay attention to the
presence of other road users and exercise due
care. Pay particular attention when you observe
in-line skaters, skateboarders and non-motorized
scooters operating along the roadside, in a desig-
nated bike lane, when approaching intersections
and at crosswalks.

MOTORCYCLISTS

As a driver, you share the road with a lot of
other motorists — not all of which are driving
cars or trucks. Motorcycles are common on New
York roads. As a driver, you are responsible to
be aware of motorcycles and understand how to
safely share the road with them.

Motorcyclists have the same rights and
responsibilities as drivers of other vehicles, and
must follow the same traffic laws as pedestrians,
bicyclists and skaters. Though you may often see
70 | Driver's Manual

motorcycles on the roads in the spring, summer,
or fall — you can encounter motorcycles anytime
and anywhere. Because we don’t see them all
year, we may not actively think about them.

Motorcyclists have the same rights and respon-
sibilities as drivers of other vehicles, and must
follow the same traffic laws. However, motorcy-
clists, like pedestrians, bicyclists and skaters, are
less visible to drivers. Though you may often see
motorcycles on the roads in the spring, summer,
or fall — you can encounter motorcycles anytime
and anywhere. Because we don’t see them all
year, we may not actively think about them.

When there is a crash involving a motorcycle
and another vehicle, the rider {and passenger}
have a much higher chance of being seriously
hurt or killed than the driver (and passengers} of
the other vehicle. Though motorcyclists are re-
quired to wear approved helmets and goggles or
a face shield, motorcycles themselves do not offer
the rider the protections that you have with other
types of vehicles. For example, motorcycles don’t
protect the rider with a frame around the rider.

Many drivers who are involved in a crash with
a motorcyclist report that they did not see the
motorcycle. The question is “why not?”

There are several factors that make motorcy-
clists less visible.

« Motorcycles, when compared to other
highway users, are smaller. No matter
from which direction you view a motorcycle
{front, back, or side}, you'll find they are
smaller than most other highway users.

« Motorcycles may appear to move faster
than other vehicles. A motorcycle’s smaller
size makes it seem much farther away, and
makes it difficult to judge how far away they
are or how fast they are going.

+ Motorcycles may not take up the entire
lane because they are not as wide as oth-
er vehicles, but an experienced rider may
move around within a lane to avoid obsta-
cles, or to help them see better. In addition
to using the full lane, two motorcyclists are
allowed to ride side-by-side in a single lane,
but a motorcyclist cannot pass or share a

lane with another motor vehicle that is not a
motorcycle. If you are overtaking a car/SUV/
truck, you might not have seen the motor-
cycle in front of that vehicle until you're
already in the passing lane. The same holds
true if you are entering an expressway. You
may not see a motorcycle that is driving

in the left portion of the lane you intend to
merge into.

Motorcycle lighting is different, and often
less obvious, than other vehicles:

Headlights and taillights on motorcycles
must be illuminated when driving. But,
with so many vehicles equipped with day-
time running lights (i.e. headlights that are
always on — even in daylight}, motorcycle
headlights don’t stand out.

It’s harder to see the brake lights. Tail
lights on a motorcycle are generally smaller
in size than those on other vehicles, and
because motorcycle tail lights are always
on, the brake lights don’t always stand out.

Motorcycles don’t have a tail light at

eye level. Most cars and trucks are
equipped with a “Center High Mount Stop
Light” ({CHMSL} which is designed to be
at, or close to, eye level. Most motorcycle
brake lights are mounted lower than eye
level, which makes them less obvious to
many motorists.

Turn signals on motorcycles are often
close to the headlight or taillights, which
can make them more difficult to see. Addi-
tionally, on most motorcycles, the direc-
tional signal does not turn off automatically
after a turn, so their turn signal may be on
inadvertently when the motorcyclist has no
intention of turning.

Intersections can be especially dangerous for
motorcycles. It's human nature to notice large
vehicles first. Motorcycles are smaller than other
vehicles, and they may seem to “blend in.”
Numbers help tell the story:
« The National Highway Traffic Safety Admin-
istration reports that, in 2015, 41 percent of
fatal motorcycle crashes in the US occurred
with “the other vehicle turning left while the
motorcycles were going straight, passing, or
overtaking other vehicles.”

«+ In 2014, there were 4,750 reported motor-
cycle crashes in New York State. 2,546 of
these crashes involved another vehicle.
That's 53.6% of the reported crashes.

Driver's Manual | 71

Another factor is that drivers may not see mo-
torcycles simply because they don't look for mo-
torcycles. It's human nature to look for something
specific. A new driver may be told to look for cars
{and trucks} before going through an intersection
— and that is precisely what the driver will look for.
All drivers need to train themselves to look for a
multitude of hazards {including — BUT NOT
LIMITED TO - trucks, buses, bicyclists, pedestrians,
and motorcycles).

72 | Driver's Manual

Because motorcyclists must take additional pre-
cautions when they come upon special highway
surfaces, you should know what a motorcyclist
may do:

« The motorcyclist may quickly change speed
or lane position to avoid loose gravel,
debris, seams or grooves in the pavement,
sewer or access covers or small animals.

« When approaching a railroad crossing, a
motorcyclist may decrease speed and rise
off the seat to cushion the rough crossing
and change direction to go across the
tracks at a right angle.

+ On steel deck bridges the motorcyclist may
move to the center of the lane to adjust
for the surface that is not even. Stay a
good distance behind a motorcyclist in
this situation.

Drivers need to adjust how they drive around
motorcycles.

« Don't tailgate. Motorcycles can stop in a
shorter distance than cars — under the right
conditions. Also, it may be more difficult to
notice they are slowing or stopping.

« If it’s raining, or dark, give motorcycles even
more space.

«+ Be careful when you pass a motorcyclist.
Like bicycles, the air pressure created by
vehicles as they quickly pass by can
affect motorcycles.

MOPED OPERATORS

Limited use motorcycles, often called mopeds,
are low speed, two- or three-wheeled vehicles for
limited use on public highways. There are three
different classes of mopeds based on maximum
performance speed. The chart below describes
the requirements for moped operation.

required when operating ©

Class A B Cc
31to 40 21t0 30 20 or less
Tc d h (km/h
op speed range mph (km/hr) (over 48 to 64) (3210 48) (32 or less)
Type of license or learner M ANY CLASS # ANY CLASS 4
permit required #
Registration required YES (A Plate) YES (B Plate) YES (C Plate)
Headlight to be on YES YES YES
when operating
Helmet & tect
elmet & eye protection YES YES Recommended

Where operation is permitted Any Traffic Lane & Shoulder

Right Hand Lane or Right Hand Lane or

Shoulder! Shoulder’
Mandatory insurance required YES YES Recommended?
Safety responsibility applies * YES YES YES
Annual inspection required YES Recommended Recommended
Title required NO NO NO

1 Except when making a left hand turn

2 Ifa Class C limited use motorcycle is used in a rental business, insurance is

mandatory.

3 Safety responsibility is the requirement to pay for or post security for damage
or personal injury you may cause in a traffic crash.

4 Usual learner permit and junior license restrictions apply.

5 least four square inches of reflective material on both sides. Motorcyclists

must also wear approved eye protection, even if the motorcycle is equipped
with a windshield. Prescription or made-to-order safety glasses may be used
if the user can present written certification that they meet DMV standards.
The eye protection must be manufactured in conformity with the regulations
issued by the Vehicle Equipment Safety Commission (VESC-8).
Class B and C mopeds can be driven only
in the right lane of traffic, as far to the right as
possible. Class A mopeds are allowed to drive in
any lane and any section of a lane. Mopeds are
not permitted on expressways or other controlled
access highways unless posted signs permit it.

When you approach a moped, use the same
precautions you would when you approach
a bicyclist.

LARGE VEHICLES

In more than 60 percent of all fatal crashes that
involve cars and big trucks, the car driver, not the
truck driver, contributes to the cause of the traffic
crash. Four out of five times, it is the car driver
who is killed.

Many of these crashes could be prevented if
motorists know about truck {and bus} limitations
and how to steer free from situations that are
unsafe and involve large vehicles.

Large trucks, recreational vehicles and buses
are not big cars. The bigger they are:

« The bigger their blind spots.
« The longer it takes them to stop.
« The more room they need to maneuver.

« The longer it takes for an automobile to
pass them.

Different from cars, large vehicles have deep
blind spots behind them. They also have larger
blind spots on both sides than cars do. Tractors
with long hoods can have a blind spot of 20 feet
in front of the vehicle. You should avoid these
“no zones.”

Side Blind Spots

Large vehicles have large blind spots on both
sides. If you drive in these blind spots, you cannot
be seen by the driver. Even if the driver knows
you are there, if you remain next to the vehicle,
it can make it difficult for the driver to avoid a
dangerous situation.

Driver's Manual | 73

Blind Spots in Back

If you remain in the back blind spot of a large
vehicle, you increase the chance of a crash. The
other driver cannot see your car and your view of
other traffic will be
blocked.

Distance to Stop

Large vehicles
take much longer
to stop than smaller
vehicles that travel
at the same speed.
For tractor trailers,
the difference comes
from brake delay.
Air brakes transmit
brake power from
the tractor to the
trailer and this can
add many feet to the
distance it takes to
stop. Leave plenty of
space between your
car and the truck. If
you are in front of a
truck, indicate your
intention to turn or
change lanes early. Do not make
sudden moves.

NO-ZONE = =

Ability to Maneuver

Large vehicles are not as maneuverable as cars.
They take longer to stop and to accelerate and
they often need to move wide to make their turns.

You can reduce the chance of a collision with a
large vehicle if you:

« Do not cut abruptly in front of the large ve-
hicle; when you exit, take a few additional
seconds to decrease speed and exit behind
it; when you pass, do not pull in front of it
unless you can see the whole front of the
vehicle in your mirror.

« Pay close attention to the turn signals.
Because trucks make wide right turns, they
move to the left before they turn right.
Look at the turn signals.
74 | Driver's Manual

« Do not delay near a large vehicle. You may
not be visible to the driver in the wide area
the truck needs for making a turn.

When you pass

When you pass a large vehicle, it takes a lon-
ger time and requires more space than when you
pass a car. On a two-way road, leave more time
and space when you pass a large vehicle. Make
sure you can see the whole front of the vehicle
before you return to your lane after you pass. A
large vehicle normally loses speed on a grade or
a hill. Look far ahead when you drive. If you need
to pass a large vehicle, be prepared and know
when you are near a grade that can cause the
other vehicle to decrease speed. Also, as your
own vehicle begins a downward grade, the speed
of the other vehicle can increase significantly. This
will increase the time it takes you to pass it.

When a truck is backing up

Never pass close behind a large vehicle that
is backing up. Often a truck driver has to block a
road to back into an area to load or unload goods.

Be patient!

It is far better to wait until the large vehicle has

Average Total Stopping Distance at 55 MPH

completed its backup maneuver than to try to
pass. If you try to pass in this situation, it is likely
that you will enter one of the blind spots. This
could make your vehicle invisible to the driver
and increase the risk of a traffic crash.

When you approach a truck

Do not underestimate the size and speed of an
approaching tractor-trailer or other large vehicle.
Its larger size will often make it appear to move at
a slower speed than it really is. Also, from a dis-
tance it may not appear to be as large as it really
is. The other vehicle will often reach you before
you expect! When you drive on a two-way high-
way, it is often better to move as far to the right as
possible to make sure your vehicle will not be hit
by an approaching tractor-trailer or other
large vehicle.

When you stop behind a truck

Always leave space when you stop in back of a
truck or bus at a traffic light or stop sign, especial-
ly when you face up a hill. The truck or bus could
move backward slightly when it starts. If you leave
enough room between your vehicle and the vehi-
cle ahead, you usually can pull away from behind
and go around it.

Passenger Car

Tractor-Trailer With Cool Brakes

Tractor-Trailer With Hot Brakes

Tractor - Trailer, Empty

Tractor Unit Only

shin 193 ft

E 256 ft

E 249 ft
E 243 ft

Es ft

distance recommended by the National Safety Council

0 100 t

*Distance based on a study of average braking distances by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety + reaction

200 ft 300 ft 400 ft

SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES

The “slow-moving vehicle” symbol, a reflective
orange triangle, must be displayed on the back
of vehicles drawn by animals, most farm vehi-
cles, and construction equipment. The United
States Postal Service also requires these orange
safety-triangles to be displayed on all rural mail
delivery vehicles. Use caution when you approach
a slow-moving vehicle and make sure it is safe
before you pass.

ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES

State law allows all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and
snowmobiles to legally go across many state
highways and local roadways. Before they cross,
they must come to a stop and yield to traffic. They
must go across at a 90-degree angle to the
road surface.

HORSE RIDERS

Horse riders are subject to, and protected by,
the rules of the road. They also must ride single
file near the right curb or road edge or on a right
shoulder, lane or path that can be used.

The law requires you to be careful when you
approach a horse being ridden or walked along a
road. You must drive at an acceptable speed and
at an acceptable distance away from the horse. It
is illegal to sound your horn when you approach
or pass a horse.

QUESTIONS

Before you go on to Chapter 12, make sure you
can answer these questions:

« How do the blind spots around a large com-
mercial vehicle differ from the blind spots
around a car?

« How does the stopping distance of a large
vehicle with air brakes compare with the
stopping distance of a car?

Driver's Manual | 75

« After you pass a large vehicle, what should
you make sure of before you return to the
lane of the large vehicle?

+ What is the best method to follow when you
approach a large vehicle that is in reverse
as it moves toward a loading area?

« When children are close, what should you

do before vou back out of a driveway?

+ How can you identify a blind pedestrian to
whom vou must vield the right-of-way?

« Where must a pedestrian walk when there
are no sidewalks?

« How must you approach a bicyclist?

« Must a bicyclist obey traffic laws and signs?

« Where there is no bicycle lane, where on
the road must a bicyclist ride?

«What equipment must a picycle have when
used at night?

~What can a driver do to be more aware
of motorcyclists?

+ What factors contribute to drivers not being
aware of motorcycles?

« Why are motorcycles harder to see?

« Why is it important for a motorist to be
aware of motorcycles?

« May three motorcyclists ride side-by-side in
a single lane?

« What is the slow moving vehicle symbol?

« Where are you likely to ind an ATV, snow-
mobile or horse rider?

76 | Driver's Manual

CHAPTER 12 /IF YOU ARE IN A TRAFFIC CRASH

There are more than 300,000 traffic crashes
in New York State each year. Even If you obey
the law and follow the advice in this manual, it is
possible you will avoid a crash. Yet even the most
careful drivers are involved in crashes caused by
events that are not planned or the errors of other
drivers. If you are in a traffic crash, you must be
ready to act in a responsible manner at the scene
and obey the law when you report the incident.

You can carry an emergency kit in your vehicle
that has flares and first aid supplies. Emergency
road-kits are available in department stores or
stores that sell automobile goods.

AT THE SCENE

If you are in a crash, you must stop. The level
of damage does not matter. You must stop. Itis a
traffic violation to leave the scene of an incident,
like a traffic crash that involves property damage.
Itis a criminal violation to leave the scene of an
incident that involves a fatality or personal injury.
Even if the crash involves only property damage,
you must exchange information with other drivers
involved. Give your name, address, driver license
number and vehicle registration and insurance
information. This includes the insurance policy
number and effective date. Give the information
to the other drivers and police on the scene. You
must show your insurance identification card if re-
quested. If a parked vehicle or property different
from a vehicle is damaged or if a domestic animal
is injured, you must try to find the owner or notify
the police.

If any person is injured or killed, the police must
be notified immediately and you should make
sure ambulance or rescue personnel have been
called.

If possible, move your vehicle off the road. Pro-
tect the scene with reflectors or flares, but watch
for any fuel that may leak. Make sure to protect
yourself and others from oncoming traffic.

EMERGENCY FIRST-AID

Do not stop at a crash scene unless you are
involved or emergency help has not arrived.
Focus on driving and the directions given by
traffic officers.

Follow these first-aid tips if help is not immedi-
ately available:

« Do not move an injured person unless it
becomes necessary because of fire or
another life threatening danger. If you must
move an injured person, keep the back and
neck as straight as possible. Put your arms
under the back, and carefully support the
neck with your upper arms. Hold clothing
with your hands and pull the victim head
first away from the danger.

« If there are wires down, do not go near
them. If wires touch the vehicle or lay near
it, warn the occupants to remain inside until
help arrives.

REPORTS TO DMV

If you are in a traffic crash that involves a fatality
or personal injury, you must report it to the DMV.
You must also report any traffic incident or crash
that involves $1,000 or more in damage to the
property of any one person. The form Report of
Motor Vehicle Accident (MV-104} is available at
any motor vehicle office, from most insurance
agents, and from the DMV website dmv.ny.gov
(search under Forms}.

When you report a crash or incident to your
insurance company, it does not mean your legal
obligation is finished. You must file a report with
DMV within 10 days of the event. The failure to re-
port an accident is a criminal offense {misdemean-
or} and can mean the suspension or revocation of
your driver license and/or registrations and those
of the vehicle owner.

If the driver is injured and unable to complete
the report, a passenger or the vehicle owner may
do so.
Driver’s Manual | 77

DMV CONSUMER DIRECTORY

STATE DMV OFFICES

UPSTATE REGION

Albany
855 Central Ave 12206
Albany, NY 12206

Peekskill
1045 Park Street
Peekskill, NY 10566

Syracuse

4671 Onondaga Boulevard,
Western Lights Plaza
Syracuse, NY 13219

North Syracuse
5801 East Taft Road
North Syracuse, NY 13212

West Haverstraw
50 Samsondale Plaza, State Route 9W
West Haverstraw, NY 10993

White Plains
1 Maple Ave
White Plains, NY 10605

LONG ISLAND REGION

Bethpage
4031 Hempstead Turnpike
Bethpage, NY 11714

Garden City
400 Oak Street
Garden City, NY 11530

Hauppauge
250 Veterans Memorial Highway
Hauppauge, NY 11788

Dix Hills
1815 E. Jericho Turnpike
Huntington, NY 11743

Massapequa
927 Carmans Road, Carmans Plaza Shopping Center
Massapequa, NY 11758

Medford
2799 Route 112, Suite 1
Medford, NY 11763

Port Jefferson

3 Roads Plaza,

1055 Route 112

Port Jefferson, NY 11776

No CDL testing. No written tests.

Riverhead
200 Old Country Road, Route 58
Riverhead, NY 11901

METROPOLITAN REGION
Manhattan

+ Harlem
5 West 125th Street
2nd Floor
New York, NY, 10027

+ Midtown Manhattan
366 West 31st Street,
2nd Floor New York 10001

+ License Express
145 West 30th Street New York 10001
No permit testing.

+ New York District Office
11 Greenwich Street
New York, NY 10004

Brooklyn — Atlantic Center
625 Atlantic Avenue, 2nd Floor
Brooklyn, NY 11217

Brooklyn - Coney Island
2875 West 8th Street
Brooklyn, NY 11224

Bronx District Office
696 East Fordham Road
Jamaica, NY 11434

Bronx Licensing Center
1350 Commerce Avenue 10461
Bronx, NY

Jamaica
168-46 91st Avenue, 2nd Floor 11432
Jamaica, NY 11432

+ Springfield Gardens
168-35 Rockaway Boulevard
Jamaica, NY 11434

+ College Point
30-56 Whitestone Expressway
Flushing, NY 11354

Richmond

1775 South Avenue,

West Shore Shopping Plaza
Staten Island, NY 10314

Yonkers
1 Larkin Plaza 10701
Yonkers, NY 10701
78 | Driver's Manual

COUNTY DMV OFFICES

DMV CONSUMER DIRECTORY

Allegany
7 Court Street, Court House
Belmont 14813

Broome
137 Washington Avenue
Endicott 13760

+ Binghamton
81 Chenango Street 13901

Cattaraugus
303 Court Street
Little Valley 14755

+ Delevan
46 North Main Street 14042

+ Olean
1Leo Moss Drive,
Suite 1412 14760

Cayuga
160 Genesee Street
Auburn 13021

Chautauqua
7 North Erie Street
Mayville 14757

+ Dunkirk
3988 Vineyard Drive 14048

+ Jamestown
512 West 3rd Street 14701

Chemung
425-477 Pennsylvania Avenue
Elmira 14904

Chenango
5 Court Street
Norwich 13815

Clinton
137 Margaret Street
Plattsburgh 12901

Columbia
560 Warren Street
Hudson 12534

Cortland
112 River Street 13045

Delaware
1 Court House Square, Suite 1
Delhi 13753

+ Deposit
3 Elm Street 13754

+ Margaretville
773 Main Street 12455

+ Sidney
21 Liberty Street, Civic Center
13838

Dutchess
22 Market Street, County Office
Building, Poughkeepsie 12601

+ Beacon
223 Main Street 12508

Millbrook
15 Merritt Avenue 12545

Wappingers Falls
29 Marshall Road, Suite 3B 12590

Erie
170 Pearl Street, Rath Building,
Buffalo 14202

Cheektowaga
2122 George Urban Boulevard
Depew 14043

Eastern Hills Mall
4545 Transit Road
Williamsville 14221

Evans Town Hall
8787 Erie Road (Route 5)
Angola 14006

Amherst - Tonawanda
2309 Eggert Road Tonawanda
14150

+ Derby
6853 Erie Road,
Derby, NY 14047

West Seneca — Southgate Plaza
1088-B Union Rd,
W. Seneca 14224

Essex
7559 Court Street
Elizabethtown 12932

+ Lake Placid
2693 Main St 12946

+ Ticonderoga
132 Montcalm Street Suite 3
12883

Franklin
355 West Main Street Room 107
Malone 12953

+ Saranac Lake
39 Main Street Suite 412983

Fulton
223 West Main Street
Johnstown 12095

Genesee
15 Main Street County Building 1
Batavia 14020

Greene
411 Main Street Catskill 12414

Hamilton
County Office Building, Route 8
Lake Pleasant 12108

Herkimer
109 Mary Street, Suite 1111
13350

+ Old Forge
183 Park Avenue 13420

Jefferson
175 Arsenal Street, County Building
1st Floor Watertown 13601

Lewis
7513 E. State St
Lowville 13367

Livingston
6 Court Street, Room 204
Geneseo 14454

+ Dansville
North Dansville Town Hall
14 Clara Barton Street 14437

Madison
138 North Court Street, Building 4
Wampsville 13163

Monroe
1225 Jefferson Rd, Rochester, NY
14623 Suite A26 A

+ Rochester Downtown
200 E. Main St, Suite 101,
Rochester 14604

+ Greece
Greece Ridge Mall, 152 Greece
Ridge Center, Rochester 14626

+ Irondequoit
545 Titus Avenue
Rochester 14617

+ Westside Mobile Units
1940 West Ridge Road
Rochester 14626

Montgomery
County Office Building
64 Broadway, Fonda 12068

Niagara
111 Main Street Lockport 14095
Oneida
321 Main Street Utica 13501

+ Rome
301 West Dominick Street 13440

Ontario
20 Ontario Street
Canandaigua 14424

+ Geneva
83 Seneca Street 14456

Orange
255 Main St, Orange County Government Center,
Goshen 10924

+ Newburgh
128 Broadway 12550

+ Middletown
12 King Street 10940

Orleans
14016 Route 31 West Albion 14411

Oswego
384 East River Road 13126

+ Fulton
200 North Second Street 13069

+ Pulaski
2 Broad Street 13142

Otsego
197 Main Street Cooperstown 13326

Putnam

1 Geneva Road

Terravest Corporate Park, Route 312 Brewster 10509
{adjacent to Exit 19 of I-84)

Rensselaer
1600 Seventh Avenue Troy 12180

+ Schodack
Schodack Town Hall
265 Schuurman Road 12033

St. Lawrence
80 State Highway 310, Suite 3
Canton 13617

+ Gouveneur
1227 US Highway 1113642

+ Massena
21 Harrowgate Commons
13622

+ Ogdensburg
206-210 Ford Street 13669

Driver's Manual | 79

Saratoga
40 McMaster Street
Ballston Spa 12020

+ Clifton Park
22 Clifton Country Center 12065

+ Saratoga Springs
3065 Route 50, Wilton Mall 12866

Schenectady
2025 State Street 12305

Schoharie
284 Main Street 12157

Schuyler
105 Ninth Street Watkins Glen 14891

Seneca
1 DiPronio Drive Waterloo 13165

Steuben
3 East Pulteney Square Bath 14810

+ Corning
77 Victory Highway, Painted Post, NY 14870

+ Hornell
7604 Seneca Rd, Suite B 14843

Sullivan
100 North Street, County Government Center,
Monticello 12701

Tioga
56 Main Street Owego 13827

Tompkins
301 Third Street Ithaca 14850

Ulster
244 Fair Street Kingston 12401

Warren
1340 State Route 9
Lake George 12845

Washington
383 Broadway
Fort Edward 12828

Wayne
9 Pearl Street. Lyons 14489

Wyoming
6 Perry Avenue Warsaw 14569

Yates
417 Liberty Street, Suite 1067
Penn Yan 14527
80 | Driver's Manual

TELEPHONE NUMBERS

DMV CALL CENTERS

Metropolitan New York City:
From area codes 212, 347, 646, 718, 917, 929:
1-{212)-645-5550 or 1-(718)-966-6155

Downstate Call Center General Assistance:
1-(718)-477-4820

Albany Call Center General Assistance:
1-(518)-486-9786

EDL Helpline: 1-(518) 474-9981

TTY/TDD (Telecommunications Device for the
Deaf):

Within New York State: 1-(800) 368-1186,
Outside New York State: 1-(518) 473-9002

To schedule a road test: dmv.ny.gov or
1-(518)-402-2100

IMPORTANT DMV ADDRESSES &
TELEPHONE NUMBERS

Office of Traffic Violations
6 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12228

(See DMV Call Centers)

To contact a Traffic Violations Bureau
about a scheduled hearing:
New York City TVB: 1-(718) 488-5710

Driver Improvement Bureau
6 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12228

1-(518) 474-0774

Financial Security Bureau

(formerly Insurance Services Bureau)
6 Empire State Plaza

Albany, NY 12228

1-(518) 474-0700

Bureau of Consumer & Facility Services
PO Box 2700-ESP
Albany, NY 12220-0700

« Complaints about a repair shop/dealership/
inspection station: 1-{(518)} 474-8943

+ Questions about Emissions Inspections:
1-(518)-473-0597

Custom Plates Unit
6 Empire State Plaza
P.O. Box 2775
Albany, NY 12220
1-{518)-402-4838

Title Services Bureau
6 Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12228
1-(518)-486-4714

For the most recent updates of state and county motor
vehicle office locations, useful DMV addresses

and telephone numbers, and other important information,
please visit our website.

The DMV website: dmv.ny.gov

Note: Approximate metric equivalents to U.S. measures
are provided for information only.

New York State laws and regulations use U.S. measure-
ments only.

The information in this manual is as accurate as possible
at the time of publication but is subject to change
This manual is intended to provide basic information and
cannot possibly cover every traffic law or situation

If you have a question about the information supplied in
this manual or a situation not covered, consult @ motor
vehicles representative at any motor vehicle office, or
write to: Office of Communications, Department of Motor
Vehicles, 6 Empire State Plaza, Albany, NY 12228

© Copyright 2018, New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles. All rights reserved.
