=o 885000 p

“Hyg O000600pHb
3S

mn
1
-

ANH
-
=
=

T=

Garman Autofahren heute oe Alfred Trachsler
Frerich Conduire aujourd'hu) - cag
Halian Come clreolare ogg - = ; I
Spanisch Conducir hay J Traffic regulations
Porugesisch Conduzir hoje = for drivers of motor vehicles
English Driving today .
| Albarisch Auto vozitia sot : = | = ab
Kmatisch/Sarbisch  VoZnja automobilom danas i. _ ; SBCH0 i te
I Tiirkiaeh bugiin arag slirmek : | iin oh pies
g- =
it is available in diving schools, bookshops and at (he publishes, a. -
5
o
=
H
=
Publishers: Autofahren heute, Laupenstrasse 2, 3008 | =| reo
Al rights teserved, Including translation rights oa Fr. 39.80

& Copyright by Alfred Trachsler, Bern
Prired by: Stampfil AG, Grafisches Uniemehmen, Bam

Foreword

Today, trafic can only progress unhindered (f all the road users

conferm to the nies, The safe co-existence of the various traffic
parlicipants in present-day traffic density depends on the ob-
sarvarice of these regulations, Nen-observance will endanger the.
safety of the traffic. This can be improved by good infenticn and 2
batter knowledge of the subject,

This book intends to give assistance in this respect. The author,
Alfred Trachsler, Been, a traffic expert and teacher, presents the
subject in a manner which is easy to understand, explains rela-
tions and reveals the reason fora regulation, This procedure helps
tha reader lo acquire the knowledge which allows him to partic-
pate correctly in road traffic.

The new edition considers the recent changes In legislation and,
tharefore, is also of helptoan expananced road user to freshen up
his knowledge: The section These figures you have to remember’
is an initial help in traffic instruction,

Security on the road consists of three components: To want, to
know and abillty. The knowledge can be taken from this book. To
want to ls motivation, The considerate driver |s a positive example
of this on the road daily,

Pater Hehlen, dipl, Ing. ETH

Diraktor dar Schweizerischen Beratungsstelle
fir Lnfallverhitung blu

{Swiss Advice Bureau for Satety Precaution)

La

—
=
=

1, Licences [Barmers). ..ciicaiie ss sms sinners greens siet 5
9. Fdamentel EE iit ih ieee Ee fee so ne srg 9
CLT CT 5 RR aS TTR RC Eh hel a
PIR" yi PEE POORRT IRE AES Te EE RET TE TT AE Ra 11
5, Signs and FOB MARKINGS § «.«iicies saison obimiineesis 14
fl. Breakdown Signs... ie be hE EER CAL, ol Cd ER Sa RBA 49
7 SpEEH SHINE ivvrn ener p rag rear reaa ats sess st ais ci i)
8 Road marking and guide MATKAME «vi cosrmemsernmnn esse nssdd 51
0. Changing direction — Sgnals cc seems ims rss preran=e 56
TL Wewing off, reversing, IMIRG Lobia hess he 3 £8
11. Driving on thernght ooo beatae Ea a9
12. Speed @gulElioNG oe -cesesii ri RA B80
14. Stopping distance, reaction diSTN0E ... ican mre Gd
18: FHBHND. cv imiiren stam smn mney pisses Fea aah ll aa as ‘ [i]x}
15. Consideration for pEdBSIENE. ccc rier risa reap rrasansg soi BS
16 PRsSng-: cain A EE KS pS A eR maT RR To
al nr ar TR al ao 72
VB, DFVING I BEL ane arse bom sha dee Wms ps vensazer 10
18, Hightol pronto dle be adi bes Td
20. Poice traffic signals and FSiochians «oer isan fi
PL [1-11 | —————— PEL TEE EL BG
93, Overtaking and deing BES... .yvmeeras nn spngess seine siriane = BB
20. Behaviour with regard 10 TRITIE. «fe ieemsssimmas immer mnyes be ge
3 Lee CROSS «is srs rahe np LE wed pe ee a
BE, Crigwray BEBE, oli i ae es Seema ie sd sean 102
9g, Stecg hls, MOUNTS ROBES ile serbian nega 1064
a7 Matarways and roads for mater vehidles... 106
D8. BACDEIUE.  covovemmnstosany prympns bens ssbises nina 114
3

cdi AR e 1. Licences (learners)

mE Lian 121 1. hota isha Bnd trailers my croulats onty with the eoesponding vehi-
OTL y cli registration pages and registration plates. Exception: cartain agricultural tral-
Coparaticnol SOUTH vn avs sein te ren rar phan ee ; mr ers with a madmum speed of up ta 30 kph.

Emuimrient for ight motor vehicles... - he. | i — Tri driver of a motor veticls must be in possession of a driving cence, a
Vani BEIEE ooo eee b iene JR gl . learres Tus! sways cay his lsamers licence with Him. Minimum age: categories
Rp Te alt #40 E18 years of age; cateoory Gi 14; categary Fi 16.

a. Th licences have io be taker along at all times and ane to be presented to
thi police on demand, the same is appicable for special permits.

4. Lisifices and permits gre issued by the local traffic autharities.

5. Changes of data on ficences and permits are fo be made only by the com-
patent authorises,

6. Tis Folders of loanoes and permits have fo communicate (0 the author
tices, watiin Td clays, any change Which cals for replacement ov alteration af these
dase is.

L Duplicates of keences and permits can onfy be issued |f the originals or
fost. The holder has 1a return the dupkcate 10 fhe authorities within 14 days after
firtcling fhe original,

aM
42
4
Ad
45

46, wo a EA a wl he RC EE
ar Li ! re : - Learner's licence

Append ‘WN 9. Thelesmears licence is dsusd by the canon of domicile. The validity of the
re Ny ~  jaamers Soerce for the categories A, A2 and F i nine months and for the me
Motoeetes af Sm MADGREAS creer snes MBE maining Categorias eightean martths, Regarding category Al see no. 1005.

10. The validity &f the leamers icencs for the categories B, G, Gand D2 can
+ be prolonged for anther six months, provided that the required thecestical test
AnEwars 10 the SEE! qUSTaNE + 15 «vias eid os ios sc tihe snr ema pies has baen passed,

Toa QUBSHONE «cov anmssrmesaniis ibebsnbins tues cries SS 11. Afar expiration of the validity a new leamer's licence can be issued for the
: same category. However, theta i awaiting pariod of two years il the applicant has
lofted al the examination options without success. This is revoked i a doc

inant confirming apts for the test = presented.

12. ithe holder of a isarmer's lioenoe changes his domicile fo another canton
ha/she has to changes the licence within 14 days lor a licence of Tha new Garon
of domiche.

i)

Driver's licence

13. The ceiver licence is issued by the loca trafic aiihonties of i

domicile ff the applicant has passsd the official test. The diving 5 dial
theoretical and a practical part, whereby the practical coe is divide in ;

and manseua ring. The diving examination & conduced oy an official exper,

14. When applying for the theoratical test for the categories A1, A2, 3 ©. C1
ar D2 you have to submit to & driving {eacher a cartificate confirming attendances
ai an emergency frgl-aid course (10 hours) and confismation of particpaton in a
Iraific thedry course (8 hours) with & diving teacher. This is also applicable for cat-
egory A. if ifs licence Is the first acquired (apprentice motorcycle mechanics, po-
lice, army).

15. IMyou oo nat pass the practical diving test you can repeat it after one
manth at the earliest

16. The drivers lconce i issued lor the folowing categories
category A miloreyeies with a cylinder capeatty of mons than 128 crv!
eategery A1 motorcycles with a cylinder capacily of up to 125 cr

category AZ aml vehicles and three-whesled wahicles with 8 deadweight
not mora than S50 kg

modoe venice and three-whesled motor vehicles exceat those
in category AZ with a total weight of not more thar 3500 kg
anchwith nod mos than eight seals apart from ihe driver's Saal

motor vehicles for tha Transport of goods with 8 total wight of
mare than 3500 kg

passenger vehicles, fire brigade vehicks and mobile caravans
with a total welghnt over 3500 kg

rrator vehicles far the transport of persons with a fatal weight
af ever 3500 kg and mors then B seals apart [mm the driver's
seat

motor vehicles - except those of calegaties & and A1 - lor
transport of lare-paying passengers up fo 3500 kg lots
weight; meee than eight seats apart fram the drivers seat arg
permitted

motor wahicks - excapl those of categones A and Al — for
transport of nan fare-paying passengers up to 3500 kg otal
weight; more than eight seats apart from the driver's seat ang
permitted

category B

catagory ©

category Gi

calEgory. 0

category 0

TAM NNN

I ht oh ce es en i hd 8 cn I tl

trailers wath & total weight of more than 750 kg sttached to ma
tor vehicles of categories 8, Cor D

motor vehicles with 8 maximum speed of up to 45 mh, ex-
cluding professicnal transport of pessons

agroultes vehickes with a maim speed of 30 Kah. The dri-
vers lence of category G authorizes 16 conduct agricuftursl
tractors: up do 40°kph if the holier Ras attended a recognized
Course in agricultural tractors, Mention in the drivar's fcence.

17. The category B driver's Ticance autharizea the: Boldar to dive vehicles of
calegones AZ, D2, Fand G as well 85 using traders of category E an matar vehl-
Ces of Category B.,

18. The validity of the drivers licence is restricted if the test i= done on vobi-
cies which ara too ight; or on vehicles with aulomatic ges bowes oF battery di
VEIL

18. The rider of a moped needs a divers cence tar mopeds, This does not
apply In persons who possess he icente of any other category,

20 If the halter of a driver's lcence changes his domicile fo another canian
hedste has fo change the feonce within 74 days for a kane of tha mew canton
of aormicife

Vehicle registration licence

21. Tha vehicle registration cence is issued by the local naffic authodbies of
ihe canton in which the vehicle is located,

22, Tha vehicie registration licence is ssussd only If the vehicla ks in scoordance
will) the specications, & safe for the read, duty-paid and has a third party insur-
ance.

23. if the vehicle is being moved fo snother canton or if thare i= 4 change of
holder a row vehicle mpiEfration foence has fo be appiead for within 14 days.

24. fine vehichs 5 nol serviceable due fo damage, repay; overhang or sim-
far than the magistration plates mg only ba ransfered fo 8 subatifule vehicle of
the zame calegory with he parrmvasion of the competent carfons! autharitis
The vehicle registration Woenca of fhe orginal vehicle mus! Be exchanoad for the
replacement,

25. I the subside vehicks 5 used for over 30 days vou have 1 submit an lp
surance cerfificate 10 the sulhorities,

Special licences

27. The Imemnational driving licences i= issued In the local fac authoriliss on
the basis of the national driver's cence, Only Taw countries prescribe th intarms-
tinea dang Bcanca.

28. Daily perrits for ator vehicles and traders ars issued an request provided
stiflicent oparative safety is guaranteed,

Driving lessons

40.  Dvbang lessons with motor vehicles are anly authorised with &n accompa:
fig person ever 23 years of spo and who has bean in possession of a Swiss or
a yall foreigy diving fcance of the comespording catagory for over three pears,
Excaption; diving lessons cafsgony FE

3M. The sccompanying person Is responsibes for the driving lesson (o be car
ried out without any danger and has 1a make sues that the kbamer does nol con-
travane the traffic rules.

32. During driving lessans the metar vehicle must cary a dearly visités bls
Rate wilh a while "Lat the rear The skin bias 1o ba removed # no driving lesson
takes place.

33. During driving lessons or driving examinations with: motor vehicles thi ac-
coempanying person has io sil nest to the laamer (exception; on exercise grounds
or wii reversing and parking). The accompanying person has Io be able to
reach al least the handbrake.

24.  Leamers may dove on very busy roads any once thay ane proficiant
enaugh tr do so. On tminlarways and Ass for modor vehickes are of thay ard up
io exarnralion slandamis.

35. Hill starts, turning, mversing and parking ane forbidden on busy rads and
should be avoided in residential areas,

36. Learners may not cary oul professional transpor of parsons;

ar, on
must have a loence for diving instructors. Professonality ls assumed if

a

Aly PEFSON giving diving kssons: on 8 commersial or profoesonalEe i

—  — — i — — — i ——

§

[FT

wa

mw Wow We RW Ed dd

| WOW BE BE

ul

body Is enidently searching for an opparunity to give diving lessons or is am-
ployed as a diving rstrector in a deving schodl or instnicts two or mar learners
(ro whom thers i no close relationship) par year,

Driving lessons abroad

88. Ganerally learners should not drive wher in faresgn courtmes, However, as
tar a5 the four reighbolring counties are concemad, altentian must be paid 1o
the folowing;

— In Garmany and Austria driving lessons &a onty permitted in the presence of a
driving instructor

— In France diving lessons ae allowsd only on Swiss motorcycles and small imo-
lorcyches ul not on motor vehicles.

The lamar have fo comply to the local traf regulations.

2. Fundamental rules

42, Everybody has fo befiave in traffic in such a manner as not fo impede or
endanger oliver ma users.

43, Special care must be taken with regard to children, disabled or aiden
prey fi well a5 where there are indicanians that a rmsd User is sbaut fo behave
cams thy

4. Fang attention fo pedesirans dnd otter fom users, espacial the van
young, keads lo beer anlicioation of potentisl dangars,

3. Vehicle drivers

43, The diver of 3 vaficle has do be In conslant command of the sama ir or
ar tor be able to fifi hs. Safely obdoations. Those Who are overied or Linder (he
mfuerce of abohol medicine, digs or simiar {overssitsd, emotionally unsef)
should refrain from driving,

486, During lang joumeys It is of uimost importance in take regular bredis
{ewary hwo 10 three fos)

an A driver is considered fo be under ie nfuence of Gicohol when the gen.
hat concantration in ihe Bbod redchies 0.8% or mare of bedy weigh,

Fo takes B hours Io amino 1,0%a of atcohol from the bisod Etrasm: The
driving ably can be flowered from 0.2 % already,

1 Cerlgin medicaments ar drugs can impalr your oiving Silly and taken i.
gether with alcohol can have fatal effects.

should be undertaken dung the couse of driving which could hinder the far:
oiing of the veg, Furthermore, he mist ensure that his afteniion is raf dis:
tracted by racks, Carpfrone or any oihar sowces of sound raomoduction, Never
wear hegohanas.

El Iris. nt showed to telephons during the courss of driving without car fee:
phgng

30. Drivers wha are resperancad or riot familiar with a vehicis have to ba par-
ticularly cautious.

51. Dnvers of molar vehicles, mapads and Boyes should Rover st go of the
steaing whos! or Randiebars. Ciacists fave to heap Wiel feet an the pedals,

B52, The wearing of safety baits is compulsiny for all avers, Exception: Par
BRSLOMING CUSimErs, profession
oe chimney sweeps, otc. wearing working clothes that could soi the safely
yn & maw. =peed of 25 kmvh on private company grounds, on daivenes, on
woodkind paths or field paths, while reversing or parking, The dhtvier is respana-
Bie fev Bhar safety of the chiidhen, see no, BESET,

83. Mever pis your weflicle im the hands of someone who i not in tha slate
It dive Jt or who dies not hue the appropriate Seance

10

4, Definitions

2 8

Mito veHiclas.

U8 vehices that move an thelr own power and ad.
NCE on he surface Independent of rails. Trams are
rat counted as motor vehicips,

are Vehicles whose foil weight dies not exceed
3500 kg; all others aie heavy vehicles (tricks. coaches,
heavy passenger vehicles),

Private Peessanger ae kght motor vehicles for the rarspait of persons with

Tax, S-seats including he driviar's seal;

Be fight motor vehicles for the transport of persons with
mare than 9 seats including the driver's seat,

are Sgt odor vehicles far the transpedt of goods,

are vehicles without motors that are consincted so
ther can be drawn by molar vahicios,

BE IwWo- or thise-whesfsd vehicles, wilh a deadweight
af 270 kg magn, a regulated maximum speed of
45 km/h and & oyindar capacity of maximum 50 em?
for internal combustion engines: they aie vellow regis-
tration plates.

Lasher wight

Toda weight

Payload

Teatal wealght
of traiar train

are one-seat single-track vehicles or imalid vehicles
{alsa twa or tnrea-wheslad] with a motor-of 5 cylinder
capacily of up 0 50 cm? Maximum speed on an even
rad 30 kmh, They have a moped registration plate.

is the weight of the roadwortty, unladen vehice com.
plete with coolant and lubrication, fuel and supplemen-
tary agupment such as spara wheal, tow bar, fools,
jek, fine extinguisher az well as the driver, whosa
weight Is assumed as 75 kg,

Is fhe wesght of the vehicle including the weight of the
pocupants, tha weight of the load and for tractor vehi
cles the weight of the loaded trader.

is re relevant: highest weight Tor the regestration of The
wehicla.

is the difference between the total weight and the un-
laters wight,

{wight of the vehick-trafer combination) is the: tatal
weight af a combinalion consisting al racior vehicke
and trailer.

69, Roads
are trafic areas meaned for mator ve-
hicles, vehicles without meolors and

padesinars.

are roads that are not axcluskely for

ee re mr  —— —

is

WoW Ww

Ww lw

T2. Trafic lanes

arg marked by continuous Ines and
broken gukding lines, and ang fesersed
fee a line of vabiches.

Ta. Preseleclive sections

of the road with two or meg lanes in
tha same dimction. Preseleciive sec-
tons are designated by “preselecting
amws', ‘preselection signs’ ‘or ‘ad-
vance direction sions with Bre noe
mation’.

| 74. Cycle strips

ae [anes reserved for cyclists and
moped niders. Cycle strips are marked
normally by broken yellow lines and ex-
captionally ty continuous yellow lines.
Ses mo. 424;

TE.  Oyclatmcks

are reserved for cyclsts and moped
riders. Cycha tracks ars separated from
fhe camagewsy by eanstuctional
means and dre sionalized accordingly
Seno, 183.

76. _Ramifications
arg intersections, bfucations, and

junctions of carisgeways. The joining

| af cycle and field tracks, exits from

garages, parkings, factories and court
yams with the camiagpeway da not

wl count as ramifications.
i

jun

private wise,

1. Caregeway
ig the part of tha road wssd for traffic,

Enmindung = nein
Skin = bfucolion

414 Traffic control bs the stopping and rieasing of trafic by the police or trafic
8.

CCL
WWE We WWW WW Ww

a) Warning signs

B88. Warming signs generally fave Be shape of a friars will 2 red border and
a biack symbol ona while base, Asducs pour speed whan pou =es § danger
WERITINMT SI,

5. Signs and road markings

#0. Signs and mad markings take precadence over the general traffic reguis-
fions,
81. Thesigns are divided nto the Talliwing categories:

1, Warming signs 4. Informatory signs

2. Regulatory sigs 5. Additional panels with

4. Priarity Signs supplementary information

82. The Regulatory signs and the informafive signs ‘parking permitted” ‘park:
fru disc compulsory” ard ‘parking mister’ GAN appear in ball-up areas on & rec.
tangs whites sign with the marking ZONE’ (e.g. bagining of ZONE with spead
fmt]. These skynats ane valid for the enti Zone up 1o fhe ern signal (eg. End of

hi

Ww Ww ow Ww

89. You will ind danger warning Signs anil in places. wivere a driver unfamiliar
willl 8 fecaily would nor rofice the danger in Hine;

80. The length of the section of road, on which danger prevels, can be indi-
(zamec by the additional panel 'lengih of roed section’.

1. Danger waming sans are paced:

al in buit-ue areas i fhe immediate vicinity of or ue io 50 m away from Fa dan-
ger paint. If they are further away, he distance js indicated by an additional
ANSEANGE [anes

Bl oiitsids Bat-on areas 1580-250'm before the danger por. If this cand
be adhered fo, he distance. can be indicated by an additional ‘distance panel’,

cf an melonvays oF reas for mone vehicies nest bo the danger point or up to

100 matress bolas, Addict thoy can be pigeed 22 an sovancg sar wilh an
adatfional distance pariel SO0-TE00 m before the danger point

AAAA

i

83. Beginning and end of speed

Woe

Bd. The ‘End of Zora" indicates that the previously signalled traffic regia
fic Li A, endl and hat tha general traffic regulations am again applicable

Li

92. 93,
Right bend Left bend

ee  — —— i — — _—

Double bend
first to the right first to the left

Ee
E
E
v
E
E
E
=
=3
E
=
E
=

ning of a pedestrian BB. Signs indicatihg a bang are placed before bangs whose siruchure flack of
88. Bag ag supeyebialion, exaimandied or sraguisy suse of the camagewey alc] demand

amaduchon of speed

le

ay Price to stretches with numerous: curves: the sign that cormesponds to the
firs! bend or double bend incluces an additional length of road section pansl.

86. If an additional pared with Supplarneniany infomation exceptionally allows
restricted traffic In a pedestrian zooe, the drivers have lo circulate at walking
pica. Pedestrians havea priory,

nammmm
We Ww A

14

88. ‘Slippery road’ warns of parficutary slippery
road surface, of uneven moads or of mads which am
particulary exposed fo ice formation.

89, ‘Uneven road’ wams of humps, bridges or
rics an tha road whens the vehicle could be exposed
in dangerous impacts or could Jose mad surface con-
fact, This sign is peace batons level crossmngs § a simi
ker danger exists,

100. ‘Carriageway narrows’ iicates ihe namow-
ing of tha carrsgeway on both sides making crossing
diffe. Thi sign is not placad orice 10 road works that
ave signafed, The width of the roadway at the mano
ast point can ba indicated hy an addition pane.

101. ‘Carriageway narrows on the right’ indicates
The namowing af the carriageway on the ight hand sids

or thal there ame dangerous projections on fhe edge of
the road making crossing dificult. The width of the
roeichwsy at fhe namowest point ean be Indicated by an
addifiona) pane.

102, ‘Carriageway narrows on the left’ indicales
the nemmawing of the camiagewsy on 1he left hand side
or that there ame dangerous projections on ine edge of
the iad making crossing dficult, The width of the road
at tha namowast point can be indicated by an addtional

PEM NNN NNN N

i, =

hw wow ww www a ewe ow ow ow w wow

108. ‘Gravel’ gives warming of bose gravel on fe
camiageway. Warming, raking distance 3 iengitenacl
Danger of sfodaing.

108, ‘Falling rocks’ wams of falling stones or siones
harry corr he camageway. The symbol indicates fram
which side the haps may ocewr Redkos speed and
chy new. Shap oF pak IF yo Gn aod

107. ‘Men at work’ gies warming of road works on
or directly alongside the camisgeway (8.5, Dbuliing, sure
viewing ar rosd making] and of associded obstacles
jeg, matenal deposits, open manholes) meguidnity and
narrowing of the camageway,

108. ‘Level crossing with barrier’
Crossings with bamers or half bamers a5
Crzssimngs al aiarts and customs

109. ‘Level crossing without barrier
ges io, 595,

110. ‘'‘Count-down markers" warms you of eval
cressings ses no. S08.

111. ‘Tram’
see no. 5856.

112. ‘Pedestrian crossing ahead’
ae 1. 421.

113. ‘Children’
588 no, 43

114. ‘Deer’ warms agansf the danpar of gee an ihe
camiagaway, Siow down, Darficuarty at dan! and asf
IF closer Anoear im poly Mesias, oii therm, Any acc
dent fvalsng deer must be repored to the police or
fhe gamelan

115. ‘Cattle’ warms of unattended cate an the car-
nageway. The sign [2 58 up in pasiure | BOGNE Which
arg nod required By law [0 be fenced Off, a5 wel as alr
ire rattle droving Lp 10 and down from siping paziues,
It is glen placed on MED oegs winde calte ang e-
guenily herded

|
|
|

| 2
E
1
=
=
E
=
=
=
=
=
-
[=
=
-
[=
=
BE
=

116. '‘Oncoming traffic’ i= zal up a places Where

orcarmirg fralfic wolad normatly od OCC,

a on motorways, § one lame is derived for tha an
coring fra

J ai the bagi of & road for motor vefticias FF 8 fol

laws 8 motorway
at the end of a cre-waly sires 25 soo 45 themes 8
section with oncoming frac

a one=nay sliesls wills CCE fraffic (S98 no,
620

117. “Traffic lights’
568 No, 534,

118. 'Alrcraft’ gives warring of kow-Byng of taxiing
grrcraft in tha vicinity of airfields and rues.

119. 'Crosswind' wans of spols where hong
froeswing affan oocurs. The eves and dreation of ie
wing may be indicated on the soc Win & windsook
Hild tightly fo the steering whos! and reduce: speed

120. ‘Traffic congestion’ warns of siahonary or
shen -Friewing lines of trafic. It may be permanent sel
up ont at places whine frequent congestian 1s 10 D8
expaatied

121, "Other dangers’ warms of dangers on the car

risen Tor which theme 8 no padicular symbol, The
ype of danger can ba cated by an sditional panel
if necessary: The sign can also be sel up al police con-
tral posts as well as ou 3 buift-up areas to give no-
bie ol trafic regulation by the palice, if the sign "oth
dangers’ 5 used to give waming of sudden gunhre, an
fcicditicrsal panied fguifing noise” is attached to &

b) Regulatory signs
(Regulatory and mandatory signs)

123. Regulatory song dicate a pronibdion oF an onder; they are gansrally
rauncl. Regulatory: signs mainly hawsea ned boeder and a Black symbol on a while
basa, mandatory signs have a thin while border and a white symbol on a blus
Das

124. Cenamlly, the ndcated regulation apples at the point or from where the
sian = placed and as far as the next junction; the instrection continues the sign
ls repeated there, The signs “maximum apeed’, ‘minimum speed”, ‘overtaking
prohibited”, ‘na overtaking lof lames’, "no sopping” and “no parking ans valk up
Io tha cry wing end signa, But at the furtt a5 far as the end of the nest
jurcticn, The sign maximum general speed imif 50° i valid up [the sign end of
maximum general speed mil 5°

125, Should a mguiatary Sgn announce a regulation hat i appicabs further
away, a distance panel is edded

126, On longer distencas the regulatory signs are repeated il necessary al ap
propriate inlervals, with an added repeat pansl or with en additional distance
ane,

127, Exceptions to sgnalled rules ane Indicated on panels (e.g. Deliveries per-
iitted, Alois with written pemmisson;).

mmm MmMMAmMAE "TMT ENN

ram

ti

Li

a WE Ww Ww Ww

Ew ue ue

a

LiF md

128.

Al spots with tha sn ‘rhosed fo all vehicles in both directions’ or where

irene Bre weight and size restrictions the inscription ‘Zubringercienst gestatiel' &
Lup

tne passages of velnclas delivering to or collecting goods from residents in the
streat or on abutting property;

he passage of vehicles balanging to residents;

tha passage of vehicles beonging Io persons visiting residents ar warking in
he ares concerned;

the passages of veiucles in which (hase persons raved as passangors.

128. 'Closad to all vehicles in all directions’ inc
cates that trafic generally © profiled Jn both dire
thang far a velnicias,

Ties Sgr floss |

- horse nds

- hardoans and prams:

— maid Wehicles not moving faster thal waldng pace
= pushed Dicyoies

—- mopeds and fwo-whasled msiorodles pasted with
the motor susitched orf

The addons panel with suppementany rfarmalion
‘Customs Clearance with the Grean Ane” indicate that
Ory CEFET Wal oes are aon ah had ne seer uf]

130. ‘Mo entry’

saa no, B21

131. ‘Mo entry for motor vehicles except motor
cycles’ apples fo af mudi-trached vehickas moluging
moforcyoles with 2

Passage for mofomycias

132. "Mo enfiry for motorcycles” appias fo all fo
amd thres-whesed  molvccies,  howenaer Aol 10
meyers aed real vaficias,

Passages is parmitied for malar vehicles

133, 'Mo entry for bicycles and mopeds’ piohibits
the riding of bicycles and mopeds
Passage ts permitted for motor vehiclas,

134. 'Mo entry for mopeds’ prohiurs the mdog of
mopeds with ie modo mang
Passage Is parmitfad for mol Wehices

135. ‘No entry for lorries’ applies to 8 motor and
samitraler vehicles whose total regestered weg! ex
ceeds 3.5 tons

Coaches are excepted,

136, ‘Mo entry for buses and coaches’ spoies fa

137" "Mo trailers’
see no, 871

1 Trailers forbidden except articulated vehi-
cles and ane-axle traflers’ applies to al motor vehi-
cles with Traders except arficulaled vehicles and one
ade trailors,

Welghis shown on supplernaentary panels indicata that
trailers whose tolal weight according to the regstration
docurmnant does nat excesd those shosam are ennai

Oh LL LE J

m

-
[=3
=

mmm m

ial WE aE el ue al

ial ml Le

ia

Vi

138. ‘Mo entry for vehicles with dangerous
poods” apphes (0 all vehicles wilh dangerous loads
which must camry tha appropriBle Son

138. ‘No entry for vehicles with wraler-polluting
loads apphes 10 all vehickes thal transport substances
which may pollute water supplies.

140. ‘No entry for animals’ apples 10 draught, sad-
de and sumpter animals 63 well 8s to callie droving
Passage is permitted for vehicles

141. "Mo entry for pedestrians’ prohibits access 10
pectesirians

142. ‘Skiing prohibited’ profits all fonms of sking

{43. Tobogganing prohibited forbids all forms of
fcomganing,

144, ‘Mo entry for molor vehicles Including ma-
torcycles’
Passage Tor mopeds permite

146. ‘No entry for lorries and coaches’
Passage Tor ght mtorr wehickes. and motoroydes B
permitted.

448, “End of partial traffic restriction’
artial "rio entries’ on certain anes am parrrinEtad by
the cormeaponding end Sigrats.

147. ‘No entry for lorries and motoroycles’
Passage for Bght motos uehioles and mopeds 5 perma
{ec

148. ‘Mo entry for motor vehicles including mo-
torcycles and mopeds’ On less irmportar seccnodry
roars aswell BS in Dull Up areas wea: regulatory Sym
bale: Pris Tee Sh TI ONE SEAE.

140, ‘Laden weight mitt excludes wahickes and
coenbinations of vehices whose operaiing wey a

ceeds tha wieght indicated Tha operating weight is the
whsight of the wahicke or cormiinations of vehicles iv
chiding driver, pRSEeNGETS Ard loacl. If thers &-an ack

tional pang slowing 8 Tighe walgght Tor oombinations
of vehicles, the indvicdual vehicles of the combinations
are rt fo coca the weigr indicated on the sgnal

150, ‘Axle weight limit enihitdes vehicles with an
axle of a Nigher weight Bri then mdicated on fhe sign
Aedes lass than 1 mata apart may together nol enoeed
tha limit ingicatsd

wer mom MM

La

i UL

-.|
—
|

Wo We Ee Ew We

151. "Width mit’ exchides vehicles [had are wit
than Indicated fnckding the oad)

152. ‘Height Amit! excludes vehicles whosd height
inchiding fad exceeds the inchicated hesght. [1 18 sit
ated peor to subways, WinRets, galeries, covered]
fridges, whee buildings proect vel Lhe: Came
and al the obstaca tealf, if vehicles al 4 metres canna
pass the paint without danger

A the ast possible diversion an Biver signal is set
Lip

153. "Length limit excludes whiclss and combing:
tions of vehichas which extsed the indicated length [ir
cluching load).

154. ‘Maximum speed limil’

sia no, 363

155. ‘End of max. speed limit’

166. ‘Maximum general speed limit 50°
soe no. 387,

157. ‘End of maximum general speed Rmit 50°
sa no. SER,

158. ‘Compulsory minimum sped’
Sea 10. 394,

450. ‘End of minimum spead restriction’

i60. ‘Direction to be followed. The diver Has fo
fun righted peor to the ig

161. ‘Pass this side.’ Tho diver most pracesd on
Ihe rightdeft hard side of the absiacke

162. 'Keep straight on.’ Thies clrhvr mls! fm nailer
toy the doit nor rigid But must dire: SErEgIT GF

163. “furn right ahead/fum left ahead’ coliges the
drives to tum in the direction indicated on ihe sian. On
motoreeEys he Pas to change 1a ha ancoming cars
rapaway in (he dnectian indicated

LZ
Ee
|]
13
Ee
E
E
=
=
=

—

i i oY a 1 Se TR. ER

CNL LL ALL LL LLL

164. "Tum right or left ahead’ chbgos the driver fo
rum in one af the inaicated oifeciions al the paint Gv
CErmHail

165. ‘Keep straight on or tum right ahead’
phiiges the driver lo fum in are of the inchicated oime-
flons at the paint concer

166, 'Keep straight on or turn left shapd’ ohim=s
Ihe drives bo tum inane ot the inchoated directions 81 1a
paint concerned

167. *Roundabout’ indicates ha dirachion fie talc
must fake in fhe circa, iE pilsoed iogpalfher wilh the na
[rc ign and may be repeated im the foci ar ihe
roundabout, in combination with the ro priority” sign it
magne that (he vehicles on ne roundaboul HERES
ing fer he eff heave print. [S06 No. 477)

168, ‘Mo right tum’ frdicatos Hl Taming to ihe right
is prohibited al iis point

169. "No left turn’ mdicates that lunng Io the kat is
prohibded al this pout

170. “Overtaking prohibited’

spe na, BEI.

171. ‘End of prohibition of overtaking

172, ‘Mo overtaking for lorries
qa ng, 572

173. "End of prohibition of overtaking for lorries’

174. ‘End of all restrictions’ indicafes hal several
fewioLsly signelized reeinchons end here and that te
LEN : requitEiions once mone ano The and of
rad works on motorways 5 indicated wilh ib i=l
proviviaa No Sonaled restnation remains oF haging,

178. 'Mo U-turns’
sed No. 364,

178. ‘Minimum separation’ racuires the divers of
mato wehicles: and: semi fraller tractors whose ols
wanghtl as entered In the registration papers exreacs
F600 kg to maintain among Temseves he minimum
saparation mdicated

mm en — |

TAM MMMM OFTEN NEN

a HE WW Ww Ww

05 I

177. ‘Brow chains compulsory’ recuse [hal
mili-track velick: including nose wilh four-wheal
iY must have metal snow chains an at least two dri-
whiasals af th 1 cubis whesls at
His1 ON one drivieg h- side; this applies
likerwiea fo three-wheeled motor vehicles, Soke tras of
oiher devices am insufficient

178. ‘Snow chains no longer obligatary’ indicates

that snow ching are no longer an obdgation

178, ‘Standing prohibited’

288 NG, FUT

180. ‘Parking prohibited’

seg no, 737

181, "Customs obliges the drivel io stop at the cus
toms house. Even if the customs autharilies do not a
ways Stop and check the vehiclps, YOU must mal ae
coed 20 kmh in the area of the oletoms post

182. ‘Police’ abiiges vou fo stop

183.
Gwcias
tham,

FaCkS.

184. 'End of cyche track’ = situated at the end cf
the cycle track. Cycling from a yale track onto a main
of secondary mad the bicyole rider has to give prioty
to thi Lier of thesa roads,

185. ‘Footpath’ obEges pedasirans to use tha path
proved Tor them

ws that horse noars and
wf ioe te track,

186. ‘Bridle-path’ noice
persons wading 8 Hoss m

187. ‘Cycle track and footpath with separated
traffic surfaces,” Il them [5 a tack provided for te
catejonis of Usars (8.9 pedestrians/oyclisis, pedasir-
ans/horse riders) and both categories have a separata
sraee Tmarkeed with an interrupted oF coolinuous: ye
vw fined the corresponding symbos are separated by a
vertical ing on the sign

188. ‘Combined cycle track and footpath’ (exam-
pla], a track without separation of markings i pro-
vided for common Les of two categones the COME
grondng symbols are shown oh one Sgn (8.0. oom:
brad cycle track and footpath]. Cyclists and moped
rickirs hae te shew consideration for padestrians and if
safety rouies have bo warm them of stop i necassan

180. ‘Bus lane’ ndicaios a traffic ne resaned jor
buses providing & regular scheduled serdoe snd may
jit ha sed By citer trafin, Exceplionar maicaions: orf
additional paoals, Trafic fmes for biases providing 8
rita scheduled sence am raked wel yaad (Eras

mm wn
Cn  —— — es  —— —  —— —

i

B® ©<0

I

Wo RW

mmm Mmm Mmm mmm
ir

IT 1

¢) Priority signs

181. Prionny signs indicate that the driver has To.give prionty’ io ether vallsies ov
that hie-has peony over other valicies. Proll Signs Sie Warming, regulon or in-
formation Sons

182. ‘Stop’
soi no, 4758.

183. ‘No priority’

zea no. ATE,

184. ‘Priority road’
so no. 482.

105, ‘End of priority road’
qi6 ng. 471

198. ‘Intersection with read not having priority’
sed No. 475,

107. intersection with priority from the right’
gee no. 472

198, “Vehicles approaching from the rightleft’ =
rt Ly xrhy Or mcAoresys anc roads Tor mobor vehiting
spp no, B63

190, ‘Give way to oncoming traffic’
aaa mo. 458

apn, ‘This side has right of way"
=p ro, 440

ae]
Ingns

apd, 'Residentlal road’ deol specially DE

reife. areas thal are mainly | gricied for feos

and whens the folowing traffic rules ano

a) The rmax. speed for vahices @ oy kerf cinvers ave
to give pricy (0 pedesnars Parking & only 2
jowviad witerg IE IE SPEC ait marked and Sig-
nafs

5] Pedasidans may whe ine antire frafic area wherely
paling And GAMES dre: ripe provided vefiske

are not unnerasaanly hindered

mmm MEN NNN

mom mmm Mm

m

Ce — en  — —

WoW OW Ww Ww Ww wow

I

1

Ww

TRY TINNY PIT TR! Tt 1

ong, ‘End of residential read’
general traffic regulations apply

ircficates that Bg

d) Informatory signs
204. Inlormatory signs that include nies of conduct are rectangular or BOSE.

Thiet show certain ngnts and ohfgations or Are mandy normave

205.
which the Information

informaiony signa ane normaly situated af the beginning of fhe section for
Jali and the length of tha distance 5 incase bry an ad
roa] section’, They tan Sena as advance Sires with an

ditional pans length o
acdcad

SLAMGE panes,

a06. ‘Motorway’
mE nim G40

207, ‘End of motorway’

meg No, 681,

206. ‘Road for motor vehicles!
saa no, G41.

209, ‘End of road for motor vehicles’
ie NO. BEE,

240, ‘Alpine postal route’
sRE no. B30

#11. ‘End of alpine postal route’

212" Tunnel noicaies a raad passing rough a tun-
fed

Reversing and tuning are profited as wel a5 ovextak-
ing of ml- track veldcles, (ftom (2 prily-arme lane in the
ohraction of frafhc
Fart if the furnal is iluminated dipped eadighits have
faba switched an,

Stops argon permilled i case of emarganay Thur aiff
ther Engrg Amimrecialely

rr — — i —

i 24
Ee
.
“i
14
E
“i
=
BE
=
E
E
E
E
:

3

FTI TT 7

ww

| TR" Ti Tl

Wo

2927 In case of

a fire in the tunnel:

— S10 SKlswEnEs

— turn off the ergine immediatahy

~ get off the vehicle and leave the place immediately,
In case of traffic jam in the tunnel:

— Blom sickens

- turn off the engine mmadistely

— ob nat lease tha vehicle

— turn an the radial

213. ‘One Way road’
EER no, GIT,

214. ‘Dead end’ marks a sifeal where Sroligh traffic
i= nol possitals.

215. 'Water-protection zone" designates an grea in
which drivers of vehicles transporting waterpolduting
Ioads mus! dive with particular cane, The length of the
distance where hs apples is indicated an an adofione
ane length of road section”

216. ‘Pedestrian crossing ahead’
see 10, 422

217, ‘Podesirian subway or large’

soa ri, 912

#18, ‘Hospital’ fndicales thang is & hospilal, ALE
Fey [ar SITE in greg. The driver shold take spe-
rig) care io crv consitferaied

{=

sig, ‘Lay-by' marks places wisn alow vEhICES
mest pul of ie roar! to aro faster anas fo overiaks
therm, WiurEEy stopping and parking f= prohibited

fare

970. ‘Stopping place tor breakdown vehiches’

sai ma Bid

221. ‘Escape lane’ indicates a red-wi whe lane wilh &
reve] bad which an be Leimert bo ein 8 vehicle 10-3
=tancietl] in tha vert of brabe faikirg

aL

aa Parking permithed’
gee no. 725

i parking with connection io public trams-
port’

p04, ‘Parking disk compulsory’
goa ri 720

224, ‘End of parking disk zone’

S88 na, Tel

226. 'Parking meters’
se M0. TR,

226. ‘Centralized parking meter”
dee a, Tal

227. Parkhouse’
Hag ro, 741.

208. Place identification sign an main roads’

soa no, 484,

asq ‘End of built-up area on main roads’
soe ng 485,

290. ‘Place identification sign on secondary
roads”
aga ng. 480

Yomroan
Fig

231. ‘End of bullt-up area on secondary roads’
soe no, 470

a9 iDjrection sign to motorways or roads for
motor vehicles’
aE hE aad JEG,

a9q. ‘Direction sign on main roads’
560 no. 488,

2534. "Direction sign on secondary roads’
gee no, 406

2358. ‘Tabular direction sign’
sie rad, 481

236. ‘Advance direction sign on main roads’
soe no 298,

297, ‘Advance direction Sign with lane Infarma-
tion an main mads'
sae fo. 493

mom mm mm MMM MMMM N NNN WN

—

Es pe————r Tf 00 FQ BQ 00 01. 1

Ww Ww Ww w

—
[——

Ww wl

Arosa
Julinr

Kehrsatz

> 4

Ww a ww Ww le

Monbijou

%
is ingel

Linggasse

- >

238. ‘Advance direction signs on secondary
roads’ are black and white and ane sloshed on mpos-
tant aacondary roads

239. ‘Advance direction signs with lane informa-
thon on secondary roads’ are back and white and
are: altuaied on important secondary roads.

240. Outside bult-up areas advance direction signs ars glaced 150-250 me-
tres and in Bulit-up areas 20-100 metres before the junction, in amy case al the
beginning of the presesciing [Enas at he laiest

241. ‘Advance direction sign with indication of
restrictions.” It = possible that en direction signs traf

fic restrictions, Le. restrictions of weight or width are-in-
dizated by the comespondrg regulatory Sign

242. 'Preselection sign over lanes on secondary
roads’ indices whee {he frafic lanes lead to. Whila
prasalacting panels over traffic anes ane placed on 860-
ondary reads, whensas blus and green ones are placed
an reatorsays and roads for motor vehicles.

243. ‘Prezslecting sign’
Sea me, 21d

244. "Direction sign for heavy traffic” indicates the
direction that stould be taken by motor vehicles and
semirailer tractors whose total weght 85 entered in the
registration papers axoesds 3500 Kg, 0 arder to avoid
toners, fon Cenfnes, aio

EZm

245. ‘Advance sign of diversion for heavy vehi-
cles iz placid Bs an advance signal to ‘Direction sgn
for haavy trafic’.

246. "To parking place’ shows ihe direction of a
parking area; if it only meant for cerakn types of vehi
fas, thi comasponding Symi 1s rienticoesd an the di
rechan sgn

247 ‘To parking place with connection to public
transport’

pda. ‘To camping site’ indicates tha direction fo a
GETTIRING Bras

248. ‘To caravan site’ ndicates he direction to a

CErAEn GIE,

280. ‘Direction to works" indicates the digchion 10
marufsciunnn plants, trading and pominencial Compa
es, exhibitions and serdar. It shows the way to Ine-
guenly vised destinations (hat are situated off through
roads ard imporiant secondary fOAs anc wiolikd other
wing ba hard 2 lind Without dlirgsctian signa

a51 ‘Direction sign for cyclists and for mountain
biloas’

: ‘Repelition of direction sign for eyclists and
for mountain bikes’

-
Ty

¥

.]

2]
E
EE
E
=
=
=
-
=
=
=
=
=
E
E

Luzern

BupSrEin

282 Traffic route’ shows the discon io be taken
in order to tur left at’ the nest junciicn whens fuming io
he left i forbidden

253. ‘Advance direction sign for roundabouts’
{ecamnpiel, The vehicles approaching from the kf have
pricarity

Do net use your direction Indicator when ented fhe
roundabout, however, whan Bading, you should use
waver in w i turn right

264. "Hazard or restriction beyond timing” 10-
gather with a picture. of the danger: warming sign ar reg

ulateey sign can be put up shortly before a unRcilion il
the rad branching off has a danger’ point or a traffic. ne

striction right after thie Linchon

955, Advance direction sign for diversions.’ In
erdor ho signal trafic dversions during road works di
wihich the dosed siraich of
well a8 usaf information regarding diversion

= indicated.

a traffic diversion can be wither up Jn Black of an or
args hase

957, ‘Numbering of Europaan through roads’

258 ‘Numbering of motorways and roads for
motor vehicles’ (2.0. A2 Basel-Chiasso)

GEsohanen:
[ fndermail

Gotthard

Furks

Cboralp

62, ‘Lanes available’ mohtales Fi

|

259, ‘Numbering of main roads’
saa Nos, 4BE/A8Y,

og. ‘Road condition’ 15 yal up al passes and ec-
cigs 1 Winker sipart resorts, Bi, wie) are sometiTes
impasse in winter or paEss=ake if ane chains only.
Tha name af thie pass of road deptination a5 wel] ma the
condition of the rosa are mentioned on this panel. ita
stretch of a mad spit up (568 liustration) he bigiskd
fiom regarding mad condition appies oly 85 1ar as ine
iesation mentored

oid, ‘Advance |nformation on road condi

Thame panels show name af pass ar declination zs od

mad and give momarian regarding condition of |

mga. On Hse panels, Ife colours have the folowing

signifficabon.

areal; road open

rai road closed Bho

has wilfy the symibsal ‘Snow hams chaims abigd
ip 03 LEE - i aq!

white, with [he sgn ‘Shnpary rac ioe OE
snowed ar jee Lp road surface

ar routing and, IF RecasaTy any de:

; hey of Janes
orpasa or ingreasa ir he Namba of lanes

1
 E—

0)

42

1h TP) TU

2683, ‘Lanes subject to restrictions.’ If & roguistin
or Ihe warning of 8 Janger 15 analy appicatie Kar os of
lange the comasponding cigral @ reproduced on [NE
{gna 1m question.

= 264. The folios signe refer to the appropriate sandices; institutions or bud
: nga:

Camping sila Caravan site Telephone First-ald station

2

Breakdown Petrol station Hotel or Motel Restaurant

=
=
=
5 denice
=
=
=
=

Li}

Rafreshinents Youll hostel Information

Divine worship
Office

265. ‘Traffic information by radio’ mentions the

: Radio programme and ihe frequency on which the clriver re
DRS caves radio Trafic information, Dutade motonaEys snd
macs for motor sehickes IE is only put up IF the fracgency

04 6 rang changes

266. On matonsays anc mads for motor vehicles drecton panels havea grean
C Raza with white [atters. panes indicating destinations to be reached wis other
ress [ave a blus base with whites hers,

L| Ooo m = is |
Ir 267. ‘Mextexil to’ see mo, GEE

268. ‘Advance direction sign’
BoE No, BET

| Misderblop
Langanthal

sDivaction sign’ 564 Ne. Gag

———————|
[4 Geneve
| T Lausanne |

Barn
| A Fribourg
s00m

| Et

273. ‘Second advance direction
sign’ see no, BH

Thun Halmszrg
Gunien || SeEER
\ be

rs

p75. 'Preselection sign’
gap ro. GES

2717. police station’ see nd (T+)

a4

4 Lausanne

Luzern
nterlaken |

(Spies
Ii: J

a74. 'Preselection sign over
janes on MOtOrNays and roads Tor
motor vehicles” see ro BHA

14% Km
(RL ]

oth, “Gonfirmatory sign’
zee 110. 548

ra. ‘S05 telephone’ Go NG, arg.

g) Additional panels

280, Supplementary mlormation is gran under the sgn on & white reclangular

nerd with black letiers or symbals on & wie background. Additions panels ars
compulsory lle signals

agi,  Informatory Sig with a blue bas

& can contain supplementary information
i white eters of symbols, @.0.

281. Distance and direction of a parking lot

op%, Distance panel = usad la sho the dsiance
fram) the sign fo Thee beginning of the dangerous paint of
the mead or to where a mgulalion Sans

289. ‘Direction and distance 10°

284. ‘Length of road section’ is used 50 show [he
length af the sation of the road that is dangerous; of
an which a regpiation appkes or whos nicalicss should be
tetean of an Inckcation,

285, ‘Repeal panel’ This additional pans Inclicates
that a sign is repeated,

y

‘Initial panel" 287. ‘End panel’

] Signais | for stabiorary
faffic jeg. 'Pardig prohibited’
Standing prohtited’ or Faking per-

| mitted) can have mia! @nd end pangls
attached to show beginmng and end
af the stralth

o8f. ‘Direction panel,’ This additional panel with an
are shdrwing te He ett ar rg indicat Bs where a oan-
fer existe ar an instruction of notice is valid, 8.0:

a) Mel to the signs cyl trecx, foal Irack or rick:
path if sucha path has to be used on the other sds
af he road

oh Mest to the signs “Parking prohibited’ or "Parking
perritted’ in order to indicate the limetion inwhic
& Non-parking of & parking snd 5 siuaiad,;

aga, ‘Direction of priority road’ nest 0 ihe signs
no pricey”, ‘stop’ or "prionty road indicates the dirsd-
fio of the road with prick, The broad ine apresants
fhe priority road (an secondary oacls prioty te the agi
apples.

700. ‘Exceptions to Standing prohibited.’ This ad-
ditional panel is added to the Sgn ‘Standing prohibited’
in order 10 indicate temporary exceptions

i

12)

~
=
=
-
=
=
-
=
|
C
—_
EL}
C|
L.
=
=
-

=~
=
4 WW

[#]48 km |

‘Exceptions to Parking prohibited.’ This
aridad to The sign 'Paking prohibited” ir ome
io indicate temparary eeaceptions.

202. ‘Flashing light® gas waning of 8 lewd Gross
ig with & flashing red light and is added to tive signs
Hewal crossing with barrier’ or “level crosaing without
barrie

053, 'jeed up carageway’ wimg he driver of 8
anewind or iced up carmagewsy. This addiidnel pans! =
ristalled under the sign 'Sippery road’

264, ‘Disabled persons.’ In order (0 EsEMHE parking
places far the disabled ihe aciditinnal pare “Disabled
parsang’ is added ta tha sign Parking permitted” a1 tre
parking spoils in questo. n {he vicinity of hospitals,
nursing homes of similar this panel may ie Instalied um
ger the sign "Padestran crossing ahead

205, “Width of carriageway’ indicales thie wictlh of
the carageway at te narrowest point whore the Signs
‘Camagewsy namiws’, Camiagewiy nandws on Ine
right’ arid “Carrageway nanows on the lef ara used

oo. ‘Gunfire noise’ 5 added ta the 800 ‘Other dan
qers’ and warns the dimer of sudden and unexpactad
gunfye noese.

on7. Filling station after next.’ Thi aciditional
panel is to be found on rcs ard ross lor mcior
wehices

258. 5 appcation field of Signs Gan be mack mae
once by adding information on an acdiBonal panel.
An sdiditbonal pared with a symbol ar a coresponding
inscription means hat the sign whers the additional
panel has been added to only applies to the type al
transoart shown on it fexception; the sags ‘other dan
gees’ and ‘one-way streat with restrichksd onoomeEng

Irafiic’)

Exarmipee , :
The ign Tuming to he nght prohibited” only applies to
hay molar venicles

An mciditional panel with fhe word ALSgEOMTEN’ of
‘gastattat’ lope with an inscnption or a symizal
means that the sign where the aedclitional panel has
wasn added fo does not apply 19 has tyme ol transport

Eames The sign ‘Obstacks 10 drive round bry The gil’

Hose nol 20ply to punic fransport veces

mom, The tollowing Symbols are used on addiional panes and indicators

al

Light motor vehicles

EL

Lorries
with trailers

ge

Trailers

48

Ee

Lorries

ELE

Heavy motor
vehicles

Articulated motor Coaches-
vehicles
Caravan Mobile Home

mm Ww

w
a ————— ——

a

mem

momomomoMm mom m

mm mm

Ww Ww ww

a a &

WOW OW WW WW RW Re

Motorsile
Mountain bila

Tram

Snow grooming
machine

»

Tobogganing

SEX

Traffic on ferry

Bicyle

x R

Push bicycle Pedestrians

Cross-country Skiing

a

Alrcraft/hinport Traffic on train

ph -]
Industrial Zone Customs

Clearance
with the Green Fine

Or dra tion signs it is possi to fing symbols ior Sports and car hemes, added
to place NAMES on place Kentfcshon sxns.

6. Breakdown sign

aM. Molor vehicles as well 85 thres-wheslars ower
1 metre wide Fave to be equipped with ‘a breakdown
sign. it has to ba packed corveniantly and should be

easly accessible in the car

A0Z As Soan &5 you ane fared fy stop your wahicls regular on the carriage-
way oF when dafactive fighting or exliame weather coniifans mass i imposshie
far other givers far Se AL in geod ime you have to put Lp the breakdown ion af
the dge of the camageway, fl may hes further used fo mark a vehicle that 15 sia
ona on the fish wigs

a03. The breakdown SiG mitrst be placed al leas! £0] rt, ot rivals wilh fast fre
fic: af 1gast 100 m behind ihe vabick. On tha flush verge it has 1a be put up an ihe
right hired side of same

and. The breakdown Sign nas not to be faut wp ior nargancy slope on stop
ping places fof preakdown wanicles

ans, Breakdown amps with Nasiing ar ruon-fashing, rnn-dazde amber kh

may be sel up in addition to the preakdown sign. Open lies oF infammatie ob
ay be =

jects are forbidden

06. Tha bnedkoomn Si fas fo be put up at Ife rear al towed vehicles.

7. Special signs

apa, ‘Dangerous Loads’ “ohicles rrarkid with
BOLE pranpeE-colnured plates trarisport dlanernls
loads, Special cars iB necesEaly

A098, Maximum speed’ signs may be attached al

yh roar of motor venice: of praslens. Thay indicats fhe
3 f ica
mrissdrrun apeed that ts allowen for these veces.

410. ‘Disabled driver’ [Mis gi may pe added is
the from and he rear of yehices of chepblied drivers, It
has to be covered I ihe valida & driven by a drier
oiler than a dissed one.

311. ‘Learner’. During driving lessons maton vehicles
mist amy at the rear a cearly vislbée blue pata with a
white 'L. i is to be removed] afer the driving lesson

312. ‘National inslgnia,’ Motor vehicles and trabess,
wich travel abmad must have tha national insigria al-
fioad at thie ear of the wabicle

fe

443. “Sehool bus. Schoo! busses may camy this Sgn
at the front and at the mar It has tobe removed or oo
grad if ihe vehicle 5 not used asa schol bus: {588 no.
G58).

theatar If the load blocks the view.

315. ‘Desf driver.’ Vehicles of deaf drivers may be
marked at the front and al the rear wilh this sign. It has
tor oe covered if the vehicls & not used by 8 deaf driver

__ 314. ‘Direction indicator.” On agrcuirel vances
—* jhe change of direction is indicated wilh a direction in-

8. Road markings and guide markers

316, "Continuous line. Confivows wikis ies may
nof be driven on or crossed by vehicles. They dani
Hr idaiche af the carrageway ar borders of nas,

hy
i)

317. ‘Double continuous line’ serves io Lenardie a3. ‘Bus lanes. lanes
the tees trafic directions wilh at least thre lanes. They marked wif orn: or Brose" re-
rea ryote crn an OF. Der Io Ines E word ‘BUS may

ww

axcepiions

fag may nol Jse

MN

siprakad Cher i
bis Snes. Excaohor

318

WENT Gf ar crossed

ny sproken guiding line’ Boks white fines kien-
| 7 | tine cine of he carmagewsy or borders af nes = anger fo fim night), provided the
[hay nay be driven eer with the meses sary Caubion arg raned ty a broken yelow ng
| | Bs
|

ers |
Iw Ea — il 348, ‘Continuous fine ahead. Thi Ong (shod
dasha, stort intervals) serves 1o give Slvaros wining =
— oF — | of CoyiinLous anes No | Joubie continue if Za 424. 'Cycle strips’ are separated Dy a brn yeliow
E ———— = ine. Excepfianaly there may Ce 8 oo Cos yeiow
ee | 3 | we end Ese

mW Ww

= a0, ‘Double line. (Continuocs ina CH
ETE RS BE to broken guiding Gna.) This ine |
als y I ric if Be deen an nar of isoed DY "
"a vohiches diving on the saa af fhe Co- |
Hino fing. if the [vekar QuIcirig fine i FE way iz profiled. Stonging
claser the oou ne may be dimen - gers 1ooget in or sight from ihe vege ar for the rapid
over with the necessary Caution lading or Loading of ponds f5 permitled |
rad = prehibibed Ee - |
ries] = parTuiied
: 3 - 345, ‘Longitudinal pedestrian strip’
aE io, Ay
= == 321i. ‘Preselecting arrows’ BE w
Ee Pp | sae ros. 414 and 415 :

396, 'Pedestrian crossing’
a nin, 421

hd
a

327. ‘No stopping lines in front of pedestrian

| ol 5322. ‘Changing of lanes! diagonal ATows om crossings’ orodinit voaTany Soong ay the carriane-
12% oe nonce that the ne hes io be ffi in the indicated of way and the neighbour Evel
= - | ractan, Keap walch on ine road and inoicale cred Ho,

[| VET TI 1

Wi

328. "Mo stopping.’ No stopping ines al tha edge of
{Fe carriageway proninlt voluntary stopondg,

508, ‘Border lines’ (Continuous, white) indicate the
pdoa of the Carma

950, ‘Delimitation fines (broken, white] sere as
optical traffic oLiches

331. ‘Delimitation lina following a top line’
appsaratas the road from other iraffic areas, 6.0, roads
prarching off, in proionoston of stooping nc wailing
[fries

They separate [he CAMAgEWEY from other ralf ansas,
which do not farm an intersection, such as exis and
froma

Af roads beanching off with rarity fo the right these
frees: doo nol AEs

q32. ‘Delimitation [line where the main road
changes direction.’ Inclicatas the course of the prior
ity rod when the latter changes direction al a jure.
The ailijer roads are raked will stop ar waiting nas:

493, ‘Stop line’ (while, CONINLOUS, dingy aeroes he
carmagewey), The top Ina Snows wihars wahicles msl
stop al stop Signs and il necessary at light signas, level
oroeesings and fiering fnes for traffic turning off. A he
stop sinal the sop ais complatad BYR continuous
karvgitudinl fire with the word STOR

5
-
a
|
o
s
|
C
5
-
|
=
=
L
=
=
=

S94. “Waiting fine’ (4 row of wikle manghes draw
acroas ha camigosway]. Shows af the To Prignty” sign
whens vahickss must stop I so requires, Tie walling ing
ts comeksed bye confinuous inngrilcinal iad wifi Hic
word STOR Exception; On toa-wey rads

835, NF road markings such 88 coninuous lines, broken quiding Wes, ele, an
femporanty removed due fo construction or chvevgions [ey are regiaced Dy or
ahge-yellow sings oF MErkes

496. ‘Surface prohibited to traffic’ white rmalciing
wilh bovdiar ira serve a5 optical irafic guides and halp
fo canaise traffic. They may not Do driven On.

337. ‘Zig-zag line’
see no, ag

4368. ‘Mo parking”
HEE No. TH

338, ‘Mo parking space’
sea no. 741

340, ‘Direction ammows’ whites]
indicate fhe oireclion which must be faker

341 ‘Direction arrows’ (painted in while on the camiageway| indicake ihe i-
red-tion thal [he driver figs to follow,

Guide markers

341i. The pouras of the road and permanent obstacies cine 1a he carmsgeway
afa aipgnahed try beck gry whiter SiNpEs

342. Posts on rad refuges pawe vierhical and honzanty black and yelow Of
ira and white stripes.

left right
543. ‘Road delimitation raflactor’ nght/fisfl if he
orrer ling af Lhe carmsgeay ig maied with & mad ce
frrmation reflection the One on the right side has a white
wfiection strips. On tha eit side of the camagewey
thier ang bwin rend wis reflectors ore soos another

9. Changing direction signals

All changes Of airaciio, afen fuming off fo the ght, fee Io he mulicatad

inckcator or by a clear hand srl

346.

irr Hire fy Les) Ee traction
47, The direction ficial must te amped for

al Filtering, changing lanes, 1wning off:

Hi Overtaking (pufng oul and cutting back) ard tum
cl Mowing off and stopping at ine ita of [he cAmBQewEy:

gl Leawing d roiancabout

mm mmmmmMmMEmm eM SNS

1]

1]

E

348. Tha direclion mdicalos
alsa me used in hie slualicon,

must

348. Da raf rely an your signals ooh: Fay attenhion fo the oncoming and ok
lnwing traffic. Balong Using pour indicator look back! AE

450, (f the size of your vehicle oF 108
focal conditions rake if necessary fy
youl to swing oul to fhe kel Defias tum:
| Ing to the aght than you have lo use
your dicatoy for seinowg out and
| wring off This manosuwe must ba
carriad out with special care and if
need be sop Swing oul omy iF vou
carrot tum off 2rd

a51. The direction iticator must be swiched off after change of direction
When averladag you mugat swebch off your direction indicaior aftr pulling out and
use it again Delors cutting bach. Sl

352. 1] avenicla has mo direciion Indicator or it is oul of ander, then th driver or
passenger must show the cheectian wilh an arm signal, If this is nol possible the
driver mist tum off with the utmost Gare, ES

10. Moving off, reversing, turning

355. When moving off, reversing or timing do nat hinder gliner road users and
give them prioty. Look back and pay Sientan io childran and evenfual nhefa-
ches,

A456. When mening off you must be sure nak 10 endanger oh dren or olher road

LISErs

457. [If albus dover of an elficka Bing anrmauricas firs lanham ia move aff fn a
signalled bus sfop na 5 hilt-cm area, then the following vehicles mus! recuse
speed ar sion in order 10 alow ie bus io dnve awy THis does not apply If the
his stop 5 on the appasie sik of the med, The bis diver meay only use his o-
rection imchcator whan fhe 5 ready fo move off; fue must wart (fa wahicle fron De-

firicd carrot Shap nme

Wher reversmog where ihe view i= restricted you must sek for the help-of
If thera i any risk of danger

58.
another parson

356. Peverss only 8 walking pacal {5 kr)

380. Beversing over level crossings and blind turnings is prohibiled

61, If you nave to reverse over & long dstancs {more tian 20m) or whens ha
vie 1 restricted, drive an the side of he road res arvad for traffic going In the di

meetin yon wish 10 reverse.

362. When reversing ai night use dipped headlights

363, Orneshould not tin a vehicle on a GETInOeWwaYy. Turning where the ew ia
[irmited, of inv hey naff is prohibited

i
=
=
=
”
E
E
E
=
E
E
Ee
=
3
E
=
E
E
k

iE i WL Ed Ub iL Ww w

EEE p—————————TEETTEET UL I
FN

Wow ow a WE WE ee

364. ‘Mo U-turns' profits vehic tes fuming at fhe
place in gueshon. IT thi
ft is indicated

also prong wihare [ha vey 5 mesincied, i
heavy traffic, on malorways, an roads for mabor vahi-
cles, one-way seals and tlnnals

11. Driving on the right

I67. \ehickss Should drive on (he agit, On Witks Carriages within the right
ial of the camagelay. They should keep as far fo He doh as possibile especially
whan driving slowly or where the view 15 resticied

368. An exception can be meds from driving on the right if the mad ts uneven
ar atherwise dangerous and In eft bends, provided the visibly is good and you
do not hinder (he ancaming or following traffic

360. When dng Koen enough aistancd rove [ho dott edge of He fos om oar
ticidar at high speed, Lad wait af Arght ard in bends. Especially ir nah Bends

increase the dstance from the sgh ene of the: road,

370, On rogds wilh many lignes use ihe one 10 he aE right. Erg
overtaking, Waning, dmg in paralel fnas amd in BU anazs.

RIDE" whan

aM. If there are refuges and obsla-
cis nthe meddle of the camagewsy
wid Fae to iriver sowed heen on thie
right hand sida, Cars tuming to the lef,
however, may diva of tha left hsend
side of refuges in the meddle of junc
lions

472 The vehicle drives may ook Cut
tg corner whan turmeng fo the =i |
Junctions.

12. Speed regulations

475, Thespesd has io Db & aoispiad 10 the choufEiances pam fo the cha
actaristics af the vac and toad as wes &s 0 arf traffic and wisihilly Cormons

a76. The driver Nas 0 ga shovwiyt If The povact ms CET Of snowed Lp or Covers wil
wet lagives, aan ar grave This i pariouany & spplicaliie for valiickes will fir:
via can brake carefully at ow se sed v1 ander fo find our whaler thr road #5 Sip
ET

277. Wier i Stas rarang the siyface of Ife CAMaRawaEy f= parhcufany? SAmery,
hecauss the dus! an the road mixes with fe dirsd rel Grog and forma a shy
mess

a7. Ona wed road with 8 herd sur face al high speed here fo gargar Cf Las
pani, LB 8 wide: of Walisr [Game in frat of the whois causing he Ei 1a
fret an causing & danger of slacking.

479, If ite veils could inden tha traffic you have fo dive sic &nd possi
sfonn, mame before spois and fires without vistaly 85 we all 25 before (Eve
L il Fk
crossings. Show goers whan 6 117 from Brill par mila dark or whan bright baht

plazas you

380, On secondary toads and jn residential areas ar on 5 secondary rods where
vehicles aie permitted with rest lone only (8.4. pedestnan 20085) tri clr Nas
to ba particulary canal and considcrats Al ir |urctions Da ready 10 Deakal

agi.  [Fitiers are cider in the wom ar or of Is raed ie dren has 10 aoand
the speed snd Stop if mecessan: Lise he Frown!

282. Unless there is a particular reason fs nob permitted to cirive ‘as slowly &3
to hinder regular raflic

83. Mavimom speed fn ds he
8 speed mn kiomeires per how flerruil,
wiih Js not to be sxcesdad evan
mad frac ang wisn ly Concirins arg
favorable, i 5 veld up fo fhe Son
‘Eng of manerium speed Md oul al
we furthest as far as the end of the
Fel LTC

384. ‘End of maximum speed limit’

385. The general maximun speed limit when road, trafic, and Wise con:
flons ara favourable fo

41 S50 ker in boRt-to areas (see no. 396)

hi BO keith outside BUill-Lp Breas, expen roads for motor veces £ And rmatar
ways (Seg my. 303);

gl 100 kmh an macs for motor veficies (see na, 90H
of) 130 koh an motorways (See S50)

Eippptions are sgoaliag with the sgn maim seed nd

386, The general maximum speed limit of 50 krru 5 appicablk in the Eait-up
area of the placa in question; it starts a the sign ‘maemum general spead limit
50 and ends at the sign ‘and of maximum genersd spasd limit 50°. Drivers ap-
poaching bulli-up aneas of insigrificant minor foB0S (Bg. Caos not linking
laces, forest and agricultural roads) must adapt to tha tpt limit even without
a sign when entering the buil-up aaa.

G0 kmh for professional reclons

Ww Ww

40 kdl whan tow away meron varices
40 kth for carlin agricalura rachors

30 kv for agrcuifural vehicles and for soriceiturs els (Bee
drivers lcancs),

30 kmh for motor vehiches or frafiers With sold rubber ar mala) Tyres
20 keh on signaled residential roads
5 kmh (walking pace) wine meversing

The above-mentioned speed Smits may not be exceeded also wher 2 Higher
spesd fmt fs signaled

387. ‘Maximum general speed
firnkt 50" 13 he coeed in kiometrss per
hour flan) which vabicias may nod ex-
ceed even: if road baffle and wsiDiiy
conditions ame fevouratia. The sign in-
dicates the beginnirg of the bum-up
ares meimum speed and applies Up
to the sign “end of mesdmom general
| ‘speed Smit 50°,

i WL Ww

Adapted speed:

(£

382. The onver of a vehicle shoud
only cirive so fast 55 fo he abs fo st
within) tha Amit of sisting

Ll

588. ‘End of maximum general speed limit 50
shows the ond of the general speed Tmt in bult-up
Rraas

580 The genard madmon speed of 80 mth appkes aftar the sign ‘and of
FriasimLTT err speed rt 50" or end of speed mit’, when leaving Iie mato
wy oF rosa fr molar vedicias afer Ina signs ‘eed of motanysy” 80d ‘and of road
fior miodor verses’

OR UL BL J
NEE ——————r— TY 0] RY RE

BOW OE OW WR a Ww

303, Whee crossing & dificult, the
aie should bye abie fo stop witifin half
tha irri of wWaeihilily fan especialy. nar
OW roass)

890, The ganeral Mam spead of 100 femh apples ater thie sign ‘reve for
metor vehicles and ends at the sign ‘end of road for maha vahiniag' and that af
120 kmh after tha sign ‘ratory and ending af tha sign ‘end of modoeway'
391. (Other spesd bits:

80 kmh far fig molar varices with a fraiar

a0 wrth for wetiiclas wilh Spike [pres

mmm mm

204. ‘Compulsory minimum speed’
This sign idlioanes the speed you mus]
not crive moar whan there aa
fvalrahls road, trafic and. visibly
fi cancitiong, Vehicles that cannot drive
=0 fast [due io ihe ype of vehicke of
{bsg are nol alowed on the lane in
quspstion,

295, ‘End of minimum speed restriction’

13. Stopping distance, reaction distance,

braking distance

== — 1388. The stopping distance LEONG

with the recognition of danger and
ands when [he vehicle stands sii

br pansists. of the reaction distanes and
fia raf ofetanca, if depends an the
spead, the diver the carriageway, the
wah and the res:
Reaktionsweq=reaclion CSiancs
Bramisaeg=0raking cetance
Anhatewag=stopping detancs

Je9.

wntil the effedt of the rakes {Hhraking over what here [8 10 do, forwarding the ar
ger to the food and jeg MUSES, SEC fhe order).

Thi rection lime depends entirely on he driver ancl 15 on AVERQE Oe Second
Tha reaction me cart be shonansd Oy wd thirds If the driver anticipates Ihe darn-
gar and fouches the brake padal as a precaulion.

The Fagclion time is the time that passes fom ha raagrion of danger

Wihan there is dangers, f & ymportant io be ready fo braks

fd

nm WN

mow mom oom WWW WWW

mmm

400, Reaction, braking and stopping distance:
130m : -

120 my

{10m

100m

Bom

Bom |—

TO m

am

50m

40m

30m

20m |

1m

=

20 km'h AD krrvh BO kmh A0 kmh

100 kwh

BW braking chatance (wet road)

Bescon distance + 8 breaking distance {dry raed) = giopping dlstancd

B35

401. The reaction-distance’ is (he distance tha vahicle covers from eoog-
psing the danger until rescdicn of ihe Drakes The reaction disiance depends
{harafore on the dimer amd the speed,

At a speed.of 10 kmh a second th: vehicle Covers {1 OE metres: 3600 2aC
ans) aparos. 3 metres,

Ata speed of 50 kM =2% am=15m
At 5 speed of BO kmh = Bxam=24m

This raaotion distance NCeasEs prgpotianaly wilh the speed, therefore ai nies
fimes the speed threeic and at six times the speed Eaten

A402 The braking distance depends minh on ihe speed, 1 Coition of tha
<TH = al Bs on = of the vehicie.

camagewsy as wal as on the stale of

(On & wet road al 8 speed af 20 kmh fis 4 meters {2 w 2), ata speed or 40 mh
fie 16 matars jd x 4) afc, :
Or a ai road the braking distance decneeses [ya FLAG panckar optima camdr
tigers by hall.

ana. Af doubdespesd the braking distance quadruples, at inp ened the birsae-
{rg disfance inCresses rinefeict, On shppery, Srl angHicy roads the Brak dlis-
tance norassas consis a
Mou have fo brake abruptly do mat Hock he whesis fora jong Hierie BE VOL CAT:
noi shear the vehicle whe the wheels are ince fhiock cegresshely,

14, Filtering

408, If you want lo tum pigtal
have to fear fo the right hand edge of
tha road: If you ward Io fm left vou
Faves fo sen towards the rds af the
ripaEd,

Rafors flaring! DOK ihe reer ran
jack Back and thes give a Sir,

ME EEE ERE REE EEE

= r— —1 407. \Whan fering towards hw eft
the diver may nol use the slrface
wikich ls mesarved for her oncoming

traffic. On roads will three anes with
8 ar without marking the diver ry Use
he micdle Erma with the Aecessary
CL

408. Vihicles fmm (0 fhe keft fed LEE ihe tram kane provided po tram && a0
proachg

408. [nomen fo keep fe drafhc moving smoctily driveys have fo Mer weld ahead
of time. Gat ilo the comet pasion before fuming aff, even when hare iE nd
road fufchion ant also on nanow mads as i as posse Before fitenng look i
thie rear rir, foie beckand Iften give a site

410. Wher Madng the driver has in De condense [0 ihe oncoming. [raf 55
wel gs fo the folowing vehicles. If ihe wel or is rater transport beads Hat
eniifd osu wisibiily, particuwar precautions fee fo be taka whan fiteding or
turning aff. Ask & perso for help in onder io supervise The manoeuvre,

a11. Changing lanes lo overtake on presglaciive Bnes 18 prohibited except or
Jxnes that are marked with he same destinations

Prasaectie anions ga anounced by passecling amows ‘presalecing CEn-
als’ ar ‘govance direction signs with fare information’

412. '‘Preselection signe’ next 10 the carmagsway
inclicats which lanes lead you lo a certain destination.
Tha top saction with the arrow towards he laf con-

"| Monbijou
Inzel

Hy |=

| Langgasse cars thi lane on the ae left, the kowest section with the

arrow to the right concerns the lane to the far right and
ihe medium section with an amow showing upwards
dicates a ine in the middia

BT

———

J 413. ‘Preselection signs over lanes’ indlcsls

Bern | witch lanes kad wou [0 which destination

Kehrsatz

ned Ey Ard

al wl

5 TWA CT -
LEW Crear showy Bar rrldnion of
sieog arto if Gla I= i
Qf he pades iran or of bale
fit. This i5 also app 3 io pedasinans coming om
the laff a5 they wood nat be able offrenwise fo cross fhe
rosa salah:

A414. “Preselecting arrows.” Lanes for drivers tm-
{rig fet, fg or going siranght on ang ented Ly wine
presales armors Af unchons the dear may dive

arroivs that are

yh [ane
ed 15 perrnitfed orl if De traffic && mol fin-
a. claar shana by using the mckeator m me!
nos nest

Wh Ww & i

422. ‘Pedestrian crossing shead' =
necessany. Deore 8 pecesinan crossing without
kghls. Asan advance warming san the sign ‘ped
crossing ahead’ B&B usad,

a

FI

Exception: On cycle tracks and lanes symbol:
a5 presdecting and direction ampws may ba yelow,

423. ‘Pedestrian crossing ahead’ & oeoad 63 650
achvance waming sion before padesinan crassyags. Ar
the pedast crossing the informatory. sign peces-
trian crossing ahead’ is put wp.

Fr

416. Vihear

cles ave (0D

straight an and nght.

(In tanas where it i permitted to fum off fl, cpoiEts can go aang te olla
tion to dive oi the rig

Ww

424, “Longitudinal pedestrdan strips’ sare demar-
tad ov he Ccarmagaway Dy oomhnuous Yow lines
and are marked by bars. They may be used by vehicles
ey if the traffic 5 mot hinoered, Parking is prohihiied,

ry

15. Consideration for pedestrians

ul

419. Allow a wailing pedestrian 10 cross the camagewy

420. The cirver has priory over a padastnan who crosses he road away from
5 pedieatian crossvg, Less he i diving in fine

425. When turning 81 an intersection where the traffic 5 regulated, pou mist
give pratedence Io pedesinans crossing the Iranswaiee Camanesay. This: is nit
Applicable at trafic kaohis- where 8 green amow gives you griorty and thar i no
ashing amber kon

EE —————r rt Ff Rf ff fF %% hE Ohh il 0

| TR TO TR

Ee
Ee
ie
3
=
E
E
E
=
=
E
B
E
E
E=
E
E
E
£

426, Linaccompanied Bind pESOng fave poorly by fokding wg thar white
stick, thin how thik pation of CrosaTH] tha cariEapeay,

427, Nehice drivers may 28S affical school buses thal ave stepped and nave
thatr hazard lights on ain very Sah amie] with parkculsy cana, They hiss to stop,
if ecessary [Fae no, 3 13).

40. Drive vary Siow Wits passing or ovaraking fies of pedestrians.
Ang. Albus and fram Sons nok out for people geting on and aff,

430, If a vehicks Ove bests 1 use he paiement [he driver has to be particuiaty
porisidarate kowards pedestnans; he has to give them priofty.

431. ‘Children’ indicatas {hat children ara 10 De ex
pected an the carragesay. This sign is kocakod near
arhiciols, DEYDIOUNEES, kre. Sto dow, Tow you Farm
and step if necessary wher there are dhildren play
an of immediately songside the road and are nob py
ney attention to the trafic,

16. Passing
434. ou have to pass on Ing right hand sids

435, Ahn passing les proper distance. Chase peed, road conditions and
tyme af vehi,

436. \Veiickes must keep & feral distance: of at least 1 metre when passing ar
ovEratang Cras YEficies

EEE ————— TT TIL LL

MEER REE EEE ECE EE

Er ff ALL LE EEE

rn.

1437. ehickes mush accord provy 10
the oncoming fraffic If passmg is rem
dereg cifficedl by dn obstacie on tier
side, €.9, parked cars, rod works.
Bla mist walt

© 438, Jf passing on 8 fat narow road
| iz not poszibie ten traker trains have
prignty aver other veficles, Reavy ma-
| iow vehicles over dghl motor vahices,
coachas over lamas. IF vehicles of he
same category meal then the Ofg
nearest foa lay-ty must revass [usa
Farad sige)

438. ‘Give way to oncoming traffic’ cbigss he ve-
hicle driving In the direction of this rel arrow tO ghve pri-
rity To the cnsoming traf

This does not poly io one-track vehicles which could
macs an the narrowed road without danger.

The signal 'this side has right of way” stands on tha op-
pasta side of the baotlieneck,

440. ‘This side has right of way" shows the difeer
procsading in the dirsstion of fhe white anow hal ha
may continue and dooming multi-track vais must
walt, IF multitrack vehicks and single-track VE HCies
with trafiers ana aveady in the boffeneck then he must
wall.

Tha signal ‘Give way 10 ancaming fraffic' stands on ihe
arse side af the bottienack

Fit

441. Vehicles atan intersection Gams
ing from different dvectiong and both
| jnlending to turn OF to tie felt may nol
| drive oud each ather (they pass on
the ff), Do not cut the comer, On nae
rey TaEtls one driver must wait url
tha other hes kf tha jurchon Give
Faved sharma!

442. Do ral rely on ha deecban rclicator of the oncoming vericss, Ne diver
right tee forgotten to switch it off.

17. Driving in line

445. When driving in Traits impodant fo keep an amok diztarce belwaan WOUrF
vehicle ang the preceding vehick 59 far §F (f seaddanly brakes, you ae aba lo
sto i me.

—ay | 144, {ater ronmal conditions ie

following rug of thumé anki:
| = hall of ihe speecirnelE oislance,
e.0. BO kmh = 40 mar

- fleasang distance cowl 21, 22)
Yi must orease the aistance: when
had weathor and Esty falp=ltr

renovations and fog)

447. When foliogdng a prionly vehicle (fire-brigades, amLNces, police 45s
with bile fgtits) you most kesp a distance of about 100m,

A Woe Ww ee

WOW WW

448. Outside bull-up areas divers of hegwy motol velices must make over:
taking emailer for fester wishicles by mugging the nght-hand side ol this road aod Us-
ing tey-trys if necessary 25 wall as heaping at least 100 m away from ana another,
This also applies to athe ratar senices 1 iney are driving Sow

18. Driving in lanes

451, Whar driving in lanes you shold keep a sufficient distance.

452. Driving in parallel Bred in hissy traffic iB pemmilted iF he rigit sacke of the
rar] fis sufficiently wicks. Drive 2 show venice i the castermeat Bane to ta nght

453. Keep forthe outer mphi-hand' [Ene on reacts with several lanes gong in the
game direction. i built-up areas as wel 8g wie avarlaking, ftadag and dmang
i parsial fies pou may Les tha har janes

453. On roads hat ane divided inte larvae Iading in the same Cirectin, the dr
wer may [eave his lane aly without endangering otter road users, The same ap-
alias on wide macs without marked [nes whens fives of traffic Bnd mceang Fi par
allel lines,

ABE. hy mis dive past offer valuoes on the right on roads wi overs) anes
i hiilE-Lin areas: snd Wier dang in paral lines, Bxoaot when Hey sao io alkow
pedestrians [0 oss the roc. Cweriaidng on the right by puling oul ard cutting
in agai is, howe prohibited

EE] 456. When witi-track motor vel
gles and bicycles use the same lane
thes the motor vebeclas must keep to
fine left and cyclists and moped riders
tr the rit,

On lanes wire It i permitied 10 um
off 1edt, cyclists can go aginst the rubs
to clrhve on the right

484. AT lnfersections of SeCOary
mags the vehicke aoprEching fom
the right has prkanty

19. Right of priority Ld

458, If you are obiged 10 ancdrd priory you de nal alowed [0 Rider the po-
arty vehick, Siow dow in irre ard if your have fo wait stop before ruleysachions,
Whare Wsibxity i= nil @ pracaubionay halt and the tel of arGliner person an aren
rECESSEN

460. “Yield your pricy to 8 der waiting 10 join the fre at an nerssction, You
will mon catch up and wan't loose ima

465. As a rule Nfersections on 8c: 1
ondary roads with priely fram the
a1, The priority nias apply etually pigfit are not signaled or rrarked

fn vehicks withoul motors, bicycles,
ners, poamons leading hoses and

AGG. ‘Direction sign on secondary roads.’ Als |
Flims black ard white and indicates. fhe direction 10 8 S80- |

pray road oF tH pops Scunsion dashmaiions a.
Foo, MUSEUMS

462. The priority vehicle must show consianstion far @naiiter diver viva might

E
E
=
E
=

nat have seen it in time at an intersaction. =
=
=
=
E
E

467. ‘Advance direction sign on smeondary
roads.’ Black snd white ano ars pul up on meee Sec:

463. ‘Youmust accord prority 10 trai-
celary roads.

fie- iy paralied lines (card driving need 10
one another with priority. even if the
nearest bd 1s sialonany

468. ‘Advance direction sign with lane informa-
tion on secondary roads. Black and wiits ang se
put up on major secondary roads. Destinafions that
can be reached on man mods anes ranked ino& bhe2
figid,

pas

panchaltord

460. ‘Place identification sign on secondary
roads’ shows the nama of 5 built-up area. Alles this
sign the overs on 4 sepancany road in a bol-ug ama.
Brigrty frown the right frevalls, These signs ait always
plac md while

470. ‘End of built-up area on secondary roads” 5
Ha hack of the sgn nlare identification an sECONCary
roads’, fre thie Lye section the nama of tha rags Dail
up ares clicated. in fhe lower section the next Inng-
range dashrkEton arp tha distance arg Shown Altar
this sion the citer i odatsnce a [eat-Lp ared, He mE
accord priarty fo ihe nght

471. "End of priority road’ mid-

cares that fain rsd pricey Coases af

this pom and tha prianty io nea ripe
if rie anpies al Miers finns:

%

472. “intersection with priordty.” THs sign can be
fread before dangerous Iersachions on SEcancaly
in, [wanna of priory from the fight at the ned 7

— 473. [nan imegeilar case, 8-4 wine
| vehicles from al directions moet at 2
| saontary road intersechion fhe drivers
| sr ciive: parlicuiardly canst and

acgearme should bo. reached ean-
caring pricy Ge ia vehicle 1 INE
{ft a hand signal

A474, [nrasectionz of Scary
nals ars igenaraly nat signaled Fx

gal up,

475. ‘Intersection with road not having priority’
a driver using a secondary road that he hias pricy

ai the next imbarsechi,

Special atiention has fo ba pail fo ihe folenadng intar-

BaciGn

476. ‘No priority’ obliges the driver 0 2000 f pronty
tr vehickes or the raad he & ap nacing.
The sign is put up just bake the intersection and mn
{if} CRBS 5 GN AUVaICE SIO with a distance panel
i fo completed with a8 waiting fine, IF the traffic is regu
kted by the police of Dy ~ figfals the sign dives nol
apply. The sign 0 pri g pamted an the mad
surface,

ATT. In ponmechon wih Ih ign
pundabout’ the sign no. pray
| shows the diver thai he mist weld pa
crit 10 vehicles approaching fram find
eft
Do pot usa your Gireclion indicate
when endening the roundabe
| evar, whan {EAvng, you shoud tise
| wor fraicator io tum fight

478. ‘Direction of prioity road” This sdofional
pana can be weed will ie signs na prionty’ or STOR
sien. If shows The driver that he must accord griarity fo
thes vehicles on the ma oad and hose leaving On
if secondary ross prkity from the right sppfies

479, ‘STOP obliges the driver to stop and Io give
pricey fo the vihicies on the road fa 5 ADproaching,
Each vehicle must siop completely at the stop fine. if
itera is no-stap Mee fon vetwcle must slop whens
wisitiily dm seaficnt in Doth direc ;
ff ihe t {5 regaled by the poses of hy traffic Kits,
then [here is Ao mead io Sm,

STOR sions ama put up directly in fant of road NEEr-
sections.

480. ‘Road with STOP sign.’ Al (he slop signa stop
fire and a longitudinal ling are painted an the road.

Vehicles on signaled main fas | LIE anion.

482. "Priority road.’ Tia sign fdicales 8 mr road
with priate If the road changes direction io the et ar
right then the acdiional panel ‘direction of prionty road’
{= atfechad fo the ‘oronily road” Sig.

483. ‘Direction of priority oad’ mcales togather

with the sign ‘oriarily read’, the COUSE of a main nad

which = atout fo change diction, Tha thick ing spm-
boiises the main fos.

mE NN
WOW OW RWW www Ww We ww Www www

moomoo Ww
EE p———— TT RE

™

rn

mm El Mm Mm

na

484, ‘Place ldentification on main roads’ wndf
cangs 1a nan fa buit-up areas.

After this: sign Chri 5 ON
a. Liailt-ur area, Place antl
Give arg wile

485. ‘End of built-up area on main mads" (5 Ha
reverse Side of (he sign ‘place denificaian on man
reas”

The sign bears the harma of the next place #1 he Leer
fled and the names a next Inng-range obective and
the clisfar 0 AT EF FRE SE NEL.

After this sign fhe diver i Of 8 ma en
sige | huff 0g ares

react our

[21] 486. ‘Numbering of main roads’
[Ea] ‘Numbering of European through roads’
[21] ‘Wumbering of motorways and roads for

motor vehicles’

487. Mumbering sgn can De placed under dirscion ard advance dreciion Signs
ae wall as under and of bull-up ama signs. They can alsa be added 10 the prior-
ity roe Sign oF stand as incependent sigris

488, ‘Direction sign on main roads’ sre bite and
 Ziirich J white, They nears that the deatination shown i

reached largely on msn reas. with png. They are
Dut Lg an man moads and an secanciany meds which
coves! mam raacls, The symbol arcrall Qn cwechon
signs mohcalos pleco with an apo

489. ‘Preselection sign over lanes on main roads’
Blue preselection signs are placed over roads wilh sev
eral lanes before a junclion to show which lane leas 10
a certain destination,

496. |F mary [ven | = rsa] hen pricnty io the gol Can oe applic
junction. In this case the san ‘end af priomly road” stands: belo he uncon on
gach road.

———t 490. “Preselection sign over lanes on secondary
| em roads’ are white, The armow pointing dawn indica
tha middle of he lane
Kehrsatz Furhermone the regulations apply for direction
[grean = mn pec WE hag oF hicsicad far miohor vehecias, bees
in ross re di}

J
™

- im road aways has Dic Zn the
404. Tabular direction sign.’ The grean and wis mr E main road thie © T ranly
fiokls show ithe direction 19 se and roads Tor p— road’ ang |

rio or vahices, Tha Blue and white Sslids the direclio SHYT IC

main roads and the black and white fields tha direction
to secondary roads

h 3]
1")

[FTV

492. ‘Advance direction sign on main roads.
Blue sd white advanca direction Signs. are pesca of
EC rasta oi pe Ofity and ofS | deny roads which
conmact me moads. Destinations which can be
reached on a mo y or ona roe for motor vehicles
are marked in & green fiskd. Dastnalions which can bs
reached on a main ros ane marked iy 2 bus fiskd or on
abk chrwound. Destinations which can be reached
onaE i
wine: Background.

mow om We
(a

(* Ta

493, ‘Advance direction sign with lane informa-
oan stand belone HeCiveE

S80 on of thé of, Ah an signs shang
150-2580 m ¢ tha finction oufsioe iC Areas,
as ovat

section of

mm mm
ry

m
ww

Teese] ther pr
4 | rity 1s given fo cone of them. On the
| | road with priory the sgn pronty road

m

iw placed and an tha othar nosd the no
pricy” Of slop Signs are placed

m

wr Elm
TI TH Ti

If & rain road changes direction
and if-sacondany roads soo ital the
came Hime, Hon tha driver iaavig the
main soad to fin the secondary road
mist ory Weld prionty 10 fhe anoomng
traffic an five man road, Af frst fd oan
go, then blue and finaly groan

800. You mest accor pranty within corning from 8 cycle rack or Corny lane,
a factory, coLrtyand or garage exit. a ing station ar a parking place, ele. oro d
spcondary or mn road. You alsa have no pricey wien Oring over 8 pavement.
If visit is bed 8 precasdionary hat and the assttance of arioiher parson ans
MECESESaErg

501. When fine Drigadss, polos Cars and amblLiances announces Hr Approach
by & flashing bite ight and hwva-tone harm aif road use rst elear itd way ard
accord priority fa the vaficiis {including trams) even whens there are [raf fghis
fF need he, drivers may uss the pavement [4 dirva pata and shop but with the mec-

ESAT) Catan

deat grant pricaly to the ONICTATIVH] ¥E-

] 502. Balog tuning to the aft oul
hicles.

Ww Ww ww

=
=
=
8
=
=

TE BE ER ER "HR TH TR TR

B03. Red comes first then bee, The
cirfiier turmiing ffl must Ghee way ia the
aroaming vedscia wihedfer it proceeds
toward him or fms ie {soa Ar 441)

B04, It a driver intends to um off io
the left ot a junchion he mus! asc 86-
cord priory to oncoming | vehios
oven If they ars covming from @ road
with a “STOP” sign ara no prinly Sign
{mee ro 40)

505. It iz Inchidden to mame! 8 confimuours Colamn of perestrEs or velines,
which ovidantly belong iogethas. in the process af crossing he camageway. Al
junctions Hee must he grantad, if possihis, pricey

508. Beyond junctions, 8.0. anivances

10 real setala, drivers of ofr wafices

mist grant pricy fo cyclists when crossing cycle tracks and sirlps alongside the

CATE)

507, Ia cycle rack runs Song tha
sine of the camagesay et a distance of
aot more than 2 medres, he same
ruts af prio apply fo the cyoksls at
mctions as fo tha wahicks dhvers on
the adiacant camageway. The vehi
devers on the sdiacen caragesay
mist grant pricy fo ie Cynirats when
tiwvurg off fo the fight.

20. Police traffic signals and instructions

511.

510. Signals given by he polica fake
procedence over raf hails,
inl: ln) Fnarkings and (rer agra repulatians

SANE,

Meaning of the police traffic regulation

LET 3
3 (mtarsaciion for traffic

approaching from al

fal] Ong ann straichea out
Stoo for raific approaching from behiiid

ci Bath arms shetoined ul Sideways,
TAparnanhi otf fret and’ bef

harming off io ha fed

of) Waving an;
lay frm in dlepciion indicated

mm MmME NENW

m mm

m m m m m

m m

m

a oa oa a a

Ww oN ow

el Lip and own mcesrmenl of ieeanm
Slow loan

512. Road users must wait for signals whan the traffic is regulated by he police.
Exception: When the traffic is flowing there is no naed to wall foe
A5 Ni S00 SIgNE al is 5 green

Bid, Compmitsony for mosd Uses ane;

trex signe and instructions of the unifomed police 2
civil defence personnal, thi
= and instructions of Ge

dl auxiliary police, the mi
fir brigade all a8 parking assislanls
stom officals and ralhwey stall at level omss

tary, the
the Signs

THE.

Bid. Af buslding ses, eval cross % tha order fo
slop is given with a hand sgn that looks i He Ihe sign ‘chased lo all vehicles in both
directions’ or with a red and white lag. I the dirk and wisn (he weather condi-

thors call foc it the signal to stop Is given with a lame ar hand sign wilh a ved ight

516. The mad wsers have fo folow the structions of the signa sofood and
Factory patrols a5 well as rien waka on Buioing tes,

516. The signals of other parsons have Io bi falkwed if they amgiven in order
Loy preven gar of bo regulate dificull tralic conditions

B17. Swivels cn be used fo reg
The sign mo means: ston
Tha grea row Sig with @ white border means: go Ea.

& fha frac af narrowing Carriage

518. Al junctions wher police regulate fhe traffic drivers fuming to the fight
fave to give priority ko pedestrians crossing the mesd, § no special handsigns ane
given to ihe pedestrians

21. Traffic lights

BG

mal
EB

|

1

-

if ifwere are two slop ines, fines. iriver

———} 52, AEd Ag mess. Shopd" The

traffic orf the crossroad can go ahead

tha trafic is freed in thai oireclion.

has fo stop at the first fog,

goa Ful green ght means fe frafht
an go ahead. Whan framing off pricey
prs? ba giver] to oncoming trafic and

| Pedastrians may cross ihe road ory §

pedestrians crossing the erogaroad.

fights

Eo. (Gree) amows peri contius-
ion of the fraffic in [ha chrgction
chow, The NRW fraffc and
pedestrians an Me crosarosd Nave

read
The orivir Fras fo follow: tha gE
row whan driving on the Jurichon

Tha traffic on the erossrodd has red

Er

— spa, If & green amow panmits you fics
go atwead but at tha same time gn amn-

i \ bar fight is Washing the QReaming traf
| = Ee ¥, and pedestrians. on ihe crossroad
- w—t iE DONT

gas, [fhe traffic HOPS it is torbiden to go ahead fen at green knits if fhe wa
hich would biock the wnction after the fights changes.

526. Mon-flashing amber Gah mean:

a) whan it Iohaws green: Stop for vehicles that are iil able to stop before ihe
fifgle Cala

fi) when amber and rag ara on iogether: Prepans io go or But the way is free
only wine thes green Sight Appess

ga7i A feshing amber light warms ihe
clriver of panicuar dangers, 8.0. {kd
ing Sites, fnciions dangercus absia
= clas on the carageday traffic lights. It
-— - fering brokendour wahickas, Af Ihe
border of motorways (I means. Pru

2 Flashing amber BGs meant:
Traffic fights cd ral wok,
Walch prionily signs!
Friary fo the mghl wien ne pwiovity signs (sed shove pice),

G28. Traffic gnts ae rerun: the red fight is above, ihe pe light Delo, an arm:
ber fight may ba placed in he rracicile

520, I tha lights are nrizantal {en the red hght 40 the leaf, the gresen [ight a
hie right, an amiser fight may ha placed in tha midds, Tha lights are round

gan, Trafic kghis arm pieced on ine righ risgeway; ON & Carmagewsy
wills several lanes leading In the same direction, the trafic fights for the alter lef
lanes one pacad on the lel sides al the same, Traffic Bahts can also be suspended
abowe the ane in quesion

834, Bleck arrows on additions winle paral; ndemasth raffic iis show the
dirai=tice for which only these trafic Rais api
The diver fas to follow the Bleck amows wher dria an He jurneiian.

532. While luminous numbens iIndcale thie ses (Hrryhy) 10 Bs ken in andes 10
come across graan ighls at the followang traffic fights green wena)

B33. Af junctions: you read only observe pronty and soo signs if the traffic &
ficit reeled By trafic fights.

534, Traffic lights ghe warming of irafic lights al
which oe must stop, I necessary. |b is placed Delore
irafiic lights outside built-up aness and Guy Bervg a5 an
advance warning sign belo trails lgnts us to tam-
porary close carlan nas, neice built-up areas if 1S r-
slaled on roads with fast traffic oF where thea traffic
fights would not be sear m Eme

535. Traffic lights used to close
temporarily certain lanes. They are
suspended above the afc Eres and
are ampioped fo reguiale ihe traffic an

| roads wilh several lames and a chases
fernparanty cafald anes

artical green amow porting dhovrmwearels mesns hat traffic can usa the lama In-
cheated

flashing yal amon pointed diagoraly cownwards means you must lead
thie lame in queshon & soon 85 nossibie in the dinection shown

rm Mmm mM mmm ENN

WOW WW Ww

TR TR TR TR

orogsad ned bars [red cross) means thai tha lane = closed. Yoo must leave Ine
lame in question and continue on a tang where a green mew indicates that traf-
fiz ig garmitied

E36. A nar-fashing yellow light wama of cbsiacles, 8.4, road Works.

537. Lights with a pedesirian symbol apply to pedesinans, Sos with 8 boys
symbol fo cyelsts and mode divers

22. Overtaking and driving past

Ban. Crertaks on The left, Look lack before owertakn wl

E4D. The crver who wishes fo overtake must show fis infantion in tne by
mazns of he direchion indicator Afar paling ou switch off thi indication

S41, Tha aver mos! pl aur canst to overtake and mus] mat impede (fe on-
coving oF folowing draffic,

542, The difference m specd whan overtaking shoud amount jo Bataan
20-40 kmh. Thi smaker the diferance the longer the ovenialiing GRtance

543. When cvortaldng you must show cansiceratan for af the fad users, es
pecially thnse you are: overasng.

B44. Af night use your headighls 10 check whether the road is clear for ower
taking (pedestrians an the eff side of he mad)

B45. When ovarlaking yx should nol move up fo cose (0 the car kt front be-
foe puting oul [possibilty of acceleration and Deller vidal before overtaking

B46. When overtaking of ovineg past Read SUCRE cisiance batwaen wilrse!
and athar road users. Tas lo considamation speed, oad conaitons amd Hess
af vehicles

547, After overfaking tive vehicle driver must oul In Sgaw 83 S0om as fhera ia no
danger for the overtaken road usen When you cul in wou mu! indicate this.

+ 4

548. Cut in ork whan yea have made sume, by moans of tha rear mirmar, hat the

663. Overtaking prohibfled because
vehicla overtaken & sufficiently far behirid

tha view i= resinciad at the intersection
andl pricey to the mgt apples

Li

40. On roads with three [anes
where the central land is two-disc
fio, the axtrame ket lane may nol be
used for overtaking. On wo directions

So Towr-lane roads the BR hal of [ha car-
rsd Ewa My not De Lise or Dvertak-
ing. The blue vehicla in the picture is
acting incamactly,

[TR TR FR i I

5680, The wahicke deer must fof
gverfake a velicle whieh 5 in fhe
| process of cvardaking another vei,

Lriess:

di tho verioie Dedng overtaken isa mo-
fewicioie or & Boyce or the road is
wide and tha view (= good;

} he isan a one-direcional road willl
Ab least three lanes fading in the
SETI CAERC TION

554. Owartakieg alowed although
the wew is restricted al the inferseciion
because the hlug car is orf a pricey
(u's wl

854, you come to an infersaction with & Hind comer yor my overtake nly if
you ane on & poly road or Fae traffic is confrofied by the police ar rafifc dghfs

582, Uwartaking is allowed Decauss
i the View is very good on all sites and
nia vebecies are approaching,

B66. (I i prohibited fo dwertale ba
fore a bina Comer ov at the brow of &
fi: any bndges, fowsver if is nol pro.
hitter

I AT LA TL I EO

TH TH TI TI TI TR VERT VR FRET TERT TR

B50. Whe dining in NRE wou may over Tak aril wien yoo ane sre of barkg abla

566. Overlaking @& pernitlsd af :
ior pat Back Ee the fre without fAndenng ofhe viEhickes,

bands and al the brow of & hill when
jl this iz possible fo he rght of the can-
tins ne and offer welickes going in

the samme dirgc ion are nol ndered,
——— 5G,  WVetvclos may not be overtaken of

hay armounce her aitertion of [Lm-
iri ter fhe det. dF thay have fitened De
lore turing fo the iBT pou can TYE
past tern an the nigh

al

B57. Vehicles which slop Defoe =
pedssinan crossing In ordie lo fet
pedestrians cross ihe road may not De
overtaken, if i also nob afowed fo dnive
pasl tham,

561. Owerghing is nol alowed i her are atrstacks 1 roof of ha car ahead
sich 25 red works, feed’ cars or padesinans crossing ha camagewdy:

ml = oe ow

saR  Cweraking columns of pedestrians & aiowed, but any with rechiced
greed, Generally 1 is not alowed 10 ovarl Ak= a funeral process.

[&

563. ‘Overtaking prohibited’ for-
hits fhe divers of malol vehicles over
taking multitrack motor vehicles and
trams: Matar vehicles with an alowed
maxim speed of 30 kind Eo. an-
(Me-gae ratars, maton hancicas, mo-
lor camisges, agricuffural motor vali
cles) may be overtaken if Hs 15 poss-
Be without danger, Vehicles withoo!
motors fcamagas, bicpoles) as will as
fwo-wdesled  motorcyias  wilfou
Sidecars ray also be overiaken,
ffowing fram ray De overtaken on ina right, overtaking an the fait i profited

558. Blue may drive carefully pest
fhe stationary red vehicle because
{rears Gre no pedesiians presen

1 J <1 J = fy +7

e
Ee
[3
13
=
E
E
=
3
=
E
=
=
=
E
=
E
Eo
E

[ad

5@4. ‘End of prohibition of overtaking'

BEG, | a vehiok shows his intention of puartaidng the necessary space should
be felt for i.

The wahicle that is being overtaken & nol alowed fo increase ifs spead

if tha parsan overtaking wodarated the Manoeue, halo fer By Sowing Cow.

566, Follow a car thal is overtaking any if pou Bre SLYe Hl You! ESO GE ObeT-
take wiihod any danger Othensdse If can happan that an ancomng Car foes
WiLL,

567. Overtaking and diving past ahstacies Is only permitted i thee is the neo-
assgny space and vishiiy todo so;

J G66. iano school buses [fal

i siop and have ew hazard fights on
| may be averiaken of why sicady and wih
Ml the necessary cauficn; if NeossEy
| stop (see no. 373!

BE. Whar driving in paraligl ines 2
| well as built-up ares on roads with
waniaLs lanes going in the same direc
tion it is permitted to drive past wall
8 cles an the right hand: Sida, prairie
Ihese do rat stop 10 ge pronly To
pedestrians, However, overtaking on
thes right boy pulling cut and cuttng mn 5
profited

nw

mw
Ww oe Ww ew ow

Ce mmm MMM Mmmm Mmmm mm

in

kil

ww

610. The overtaking of & crawler vehicle calls for 2 minimum Sidi distance of 1
matre, On narmw roads overtaking iE only genre if the driver of the crauider we-
hile has given a signal thal the road 5 free.

67.
anos:
Higher sped times Higher speed ot
wig by the cilference of both speeds
{rue of thurmi)

Example: The speads are 60 kmh and
40 koh, The overiglang distance (5
fi) x Bl) = 3600:20 = 180 melars.

Ch roads with oncoming iralfic af feast
doute the distances has ta be free and
visite.

Word out the dveraking ofs-

572. 'Mo overtaking for lores’ profibis the dn
vers of motor vehicles and sevmilralier trucks whose o-
tal waight exceeds 3.5 tans fo overtake motor vehicles
driving in various nas as wall as rams. The same ex-
ceptions as for ih sgn Overtaking prohibited” ans 8p-
piicabie.

This prohibition fs nol appicahie IoF coaches.

573. ‘End of prohibition of overtaking for lomies'

23. Behaviour with regard to trams

ERGY EXTER Wie comes rain

y 577.
Fas Bf

oa,

Here Groen

Buse can cad

fin an #
enough Race

io avowd the tram,

0 & Frain

fide CiOMin 50
2 for the: fram.

J

wm

mm mm Wm

mmm om oMmom mom mm

EB

fie]

He FI
| of oda ml

= a GBR2. The mou
BEN faker on the

=

a (hers 5 a steel f

fram i fo be ovirlake

wo ram mast Da oer-

583, he trea Iraveals on fhe far right
mn omay be overfaken on the efi, pro-
vided the necessary apace B wails,
the prionty of other rosd users is not
impared and the oncoming traffic =
reat hindered,

584. If the tram does not ravel on
the far nght and the space on the night
is blocked by parked cars or roed
works. overtaking is permitted only on
fhe faft if no side stroal enters and be
ancorming traffic jis not hindered,

585. Tram" wams of trams namely prior to intakes
tions with trams in buill-up areas, Cutside Dull-up
areas intersections with trams ame signalled as love
Gnssings

506. || al tram stops without street reluges passengers. of thx tram have bo
alight directly on io the camiageway the cars an the same half of the road have to
slop until they have passed

BET. Cavs are never Io stop ar to park voluntanly edbier an the fees or within
| 50 metas of herr except vwhens parking spaces ang marked our

GAB. When wating bated 8 stationary fram a disfance of af les! 2 meters is Io
ba keod (ram could dave Daok),

a8

Ee
E
(3
b
3
E
E
E
=
=
3
3
3
3
E
3
3
E
E

im ml wm lw

ml

{TR TR *

5a, When driving behind a tram at nema) isd conditiores keep a distance of
at least 7 seconds or hall 8s many meters 28 kilometres par hour ang being driven
trulé af thumb).

890. After the sign ‘ovaraking profebiten!” it is alowed fo die DEST 8 Liem on
tha right. Overtaking an the laff fs probibiled

Driving betwesn tha sires
refuges & afowed as lang as thers is
ni tram approaching; spacsal attention
must be pest Lo pedestrians

1.584. Drive slowly before a level
creasing and stop Ha frain should ap-
proach, the bemrérs close. or -signais
are Mashing. Switch off your anginal

595, ‘Level crossing without barrier’ i5 Used 85 an
AVANTE WATE Sig fo announce evel crossings will
fishing fights oFa St. Andrew's Cross. Al evel Cross
ings with fishing fights the addifonal pana Mesmng
ght! is added,

28

- -
r'S ® 506, ‘Flashing Haht is added to ihe signs ‘Level - | = 605. If baniers or flashing kghis ara supplemented by an SooUSLC warming de
® [ crossing with bamer® ar ' Lewd crossing without barrier vices the acolste: signal maans “STORY
> at bevel crossings with Bashing legis 3 -
|
¥ = o 606. The lewd crossing has fo be ciossad yatholdt wisting any firm,
507, ‘Level crossing with barrier’ stands as an ao |
vance warning sign betoms lel crossings wih hialf-bar- :
ris or Damiers. At level crossings with flashing lights "3 u u 607. Should the mctor stall on the lings, drive sway in Bottom gear or in MEverss
the sdoitional panel ‘fashing tight" is added. by using the starter [This does nolL app Io wahichas | aUAomERC Transmissid) |
F ( E. |
506. ‘Countdown markers. The cour | )
Pe [Tiarkar with (hee stripes Stands une Ne Sirs level F Li = = — == =r | B08. Owerfaking is profited at and
>” Pg crossing with Bbamin” and ‘uel crossing without bar- oa cirectly before level crossings witfour
le var that with twa stipes after one third and that with FE y LC bamers.
one slrine after two Hiros of the distance batwesn He Exception: Pedestrians, cysts ‘and i
BcaneS WEMIng Sign and The level crossing. (Exempla: i matorcyoisis may be overtaken pro
Acne Warning sign 180 mdélres before he faved FE 1 | BS inked there is suihchend visiity
crosaig, [efance. Delwean aach courifoomwn marker
0 mele) ¥
} i
599, Tha half bare [5 equal to the Dames i

B00. Fed and white striped barriers of half bamiers, flashing lights, St. Andrew's -

Crosses, acoustic skrals and trafic gis iderify lea] crossings,

608. Af level crossings wilh besmiens
overtaking is not profeoitad

mom
nl

f01. St Andrew's Grosses al level crossings without barrier

PZ

single fing multiple lines

rey mm TE
TTR a

mn
-

disehing baht means: “STOR . ; 50
B02. Red flashing ight means: GTLF B10. Parking iz prohibiter within 50 meires of 8 evel crossing outside Dult-up

- arogs. Keen fr rived tht parking on msm roads Guisics built-up areas 15 basicaly
rE | LC | profited, |
| Levi crossings in bint up areas; Parking 5 prohiitad witfin 20 metres of 8 level
wig cess |
03. Flashing lights B04. Ahernating lights =
{00 E it | 1H

1811. Oulside Duit-up amas beavy
vehicles rust stan af feast 100 melnes
away fron the level crossing io alow
fifomamg vehicles in overtake ham

612. Road sers may rot open, walk round, give Found or ope Darmers af
3 5 a Far
hal-bamiars, aise those at anports or others. Bamers mda)’ im ba climbed aver oF
Figlal

E13. Poad users hen prionity al crossngs oval connecting recks which arg not
signaled by a SI, fndews Crees GF leas, 25 wel 85 CroSsnOE OVel TUES
Traffic mgulation by trate fights or muiiany personnel exceed.

61d. At road junctions wilh trafic lights Ts possible that level crossings amare:
uated with These traffic lights cnn

25, One-way streets

§17. ‘One-way street’ idee: 5 road that is to De
divers art dn The indicated airection ofl At the other
and of this road the sign no entry” 5 salu.
Cingeway roads are agus io Be nigh hard Side of a
camageeEy which i= open io trafic in both cirection=
Peirtdng ar stepping on Ha left hand sides of One-Way
eirsats 5 alowed,

Clriving past sro! refuges, ohstackes and rams 00 tha
Jolt or right side is alowed

Tigrming fs profibxien Co
Th game apphes fo reversing. Excephon Parking,
couing ai tales or simian

Ee
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
Z
E

(Fi

wow ow wow oe ow ow Ww ow Ww Ww

w ow a

| 618. Price |o burning, eft on ona-way
siresls you hee bo filter to the far left.
Excaption: if restricted oncoming trafic
15 glossed (ses no. G20)

619. ‘Oncoming traffic’ = sel up before sirsches af
oad where the driver does not expect any oncoming
traffic, for example at the ecd of one-way sires, as
S00 658 stretch of road with oncoming trac felows

620, ‘One-way street with restricted oncoming
traffhe' clentifies one-way atresia where ococaneng tral
fic is authorised: tha toe of oncoming traffic is marked
with the comesponding symbol or Inscripfion (Kar axa
pla Greasy sinosl with oncoming bicycles), Whan ume
rg left da not fer lo he far al

621. ‘No entry’ signifies hat entry is profiled for 5
ahiciag, howevay oncoming fraffic is permite. At the
and of ihe road the sions! ‘one-wey steal 5 placed,
The sign ‘ne antry' is mal aopdesbia for hand carts of
max, T metre witlth, prams, vale weficias af waking
pace, whan pushing a Hioyoke as wall as mopeds and
two-wheeled’ molonsioies withoul thie metas ranming,
Exceptions frovi the sign no ently’ ae vicaled ofr an
adcifional pans by he comespeniing whic symbols
ar mzoripbons

26. Steep hills, mountain roads

624. ‘Dangerous descents’ gives waning of
stralehes of road with & downward gradient of at leas!
J. The signal base the madimum gradient of Ife
stretch of road concerned. On descends [fe Braking
OVE [CE 15 Dre

Shift inl & our gear in ood nal

625, ‘Steep ascent’ gas wamng of siretches of
road with sn upward grackent of at least 10%. The Sig-
nal bess the mesdmum gradiant af the stralch

Shit rte over gear in paced timal

B26. Ci sheap fills and mountain roads you must dive 50 88 nol lo ova
Ha fraitien. Shift into the aporopriate mea 0 onder fo save braking, Never Shifl- to
neutral or frsmwhasd down a nl!

a BZY. N passkig is offical on famow
rods tha vahioles going aogwnil rivst
he the first fo sfop,

628. | passing i mol posse combiatons of vehickes have prionty before
thir vilhicks, heavy mator viahiclss before fight ones and coaches before limes
When vetoes of fhe 28mg category ie Unatke [0 pass Ie Oe Dov aren
mat reverse WHiess the oliver (8 neara passing pene.

620, IF several heavy vehiches are following each other at shon Imervals and
crasaing bs difficult, ‘drivers should draw the attention of the ancarming traffic 10
this Crcumsiance

10d

wm

m

momma

mom om om mm

mom mm Mm

"ERE ERE ERE ERERERRRERER

Ww ww

630. ‘Alpine postal route.” Whar passing and alee
Tali cre (RCL IF I nacessany fo choos NE sie
hows acl Sie EL en Ly fre cafe H di Iranspon
vahicias. Pubic frarspot wafucies on apne Dosis!
mites usa a threa-ione hom

631. ‘End of alpine postal route”

27. Motorways and roads for motor vehicles

634. Erection signs bo moboneays and reds for ma-
tar vehicles ane green and white, Thay show [he way 10
makoraays and ads for motor vehices

635. ‘Direction sign to motorways and roads for
motor vehicles." If hare & only one moiorvay, road
for motor vehicles or mofoeway ing in & region: green
diraction signs wilh the shite symbol “mestorsey ar
road for motor wahiclkes” can ba used

G36. ‘Tabular direction sign.’ The green and while
figdds show the direction Io motorways and roads on
rmaolor welche:

+ Zurich
+ Basel
Luzern =
B37. Motanidys amd oaks for motor vehicies sre reserved for molar weincins
and are signaled according Thay may nol be used By bicycles, mopeds and
peaches,
638. Molorweya have separaled camacewaps for each’ of ihe ho directions

and arg free from crossroads,

105

639. Motorways and roads for moll vehicles are identified by the Signs
‘rotary’ and ‘rads Tor rotor vehiches'

i\

Tam’

=

540 ‘Motorway sign’ i 520 ug G41 “Road for motor vehicies sign’
af tha bagiying of fhe aceess i wed Lin al the begining of the AC0BES
fare fo a motorway fan 10 a road for motor ahichag

642. The masimm sped {irmit ov) mGanways 4 100 kart nel on roan for mo
Io vehicles TOO kTEn. : "
(in yosds for maior vehicle the maxTmLMm spead 15 always dia tect with the sign
"Wasim speed nt”

643. Modnnvays and rats or mctar wahiclag are reserved or fii vehicles
which can and may travel at G0 kmh, Bloydiss, imomeds and small feoforcoied
are nol alowed!

Gad. Traci, Cramer vihigkes and veficies with she Fes may nol Lee ii
avs and 2 '& ¥ : 5 wins se also
farways and mads fof mator vehicles. Test courses and sports evans 5
prohibitod

gas. Wotan wetncles and trailers with a total weight of 3.5 trons have 10 carry a
vigretis,

G46, On scores lanes right at the Boaginning of tha rbhonwaEy of the iri
x - il m=
for vehicles the Sign To perarity” (5 2a LR. Lak Bahired you adiis! speed, USS
raotian indicator and fin the [raf al thie dght moment

547. ‘Acceleration lanes’ are Bros
wich lactate rir imo tha strat of
traffic arr modonways and roads for mas
tor velicias, They ant found at coved
ans ann used for diag away from
installations alongsics the matory or
road fo mods wishiclas.

E
E
3
3
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

(il

(naa!

B48. ‘Confirmatory sign’ is sal up Bl connections
ard) after pnctions. This sign which lls long-range
destinations is ordered according 10 prosmily from bok-
tear Eo Bg.

Harich 143 Em
Basil 114 Km
Lalpanss 116 Km
Hern Ja pm

G48, Whan diving in ines kee sufficient distance; ihe car m front of your it
brake unexpactodly Rearend Ccoliins ae a mak gangeron motonaays.

B50. Driving on motorways is easy, Bosse of (he dangers of monatony, fatigue
and negligence.

BE. Lian the right-hand lane wien driving sow

E852. The lane to the left serves for overlaking anly. Excenton: heaky Praffic on
bith (anes whan driving # linss

653. On motorways with af eas
three anes §1 the same oFecian hou
may drive on ihe Ene fo the exdreme

i eft oily wife your valle i aliowed i
armed 80 kr

B54. The diver may dive past vehicles on the right hand side In the. folowing
cases any:

a) wher driving in paral ines;

bh) an fitering lanes, provided that difisent desfinelions ale signaiad for each
ae:

¢) on acceleration sindohes of actess Ehes up to he end of tha doutde ina
Marking,

a) on deceleralion lanes of xi pons,

55, Owertakng on ih right lor CHENG janes & prohibited

656.

_ nok in Tha rear mii

Prior fo ovErtaFyL

— lak betirad your
— Ee your oestan Indicator {switch off fie signal ater you Eve changed lanes)

ioe Biahing! you
change lanes,

rhe evsariakimg lane fnust he free for 8 Jong way hedred wolr,

g57. (Cwariake QUICK - dior’ | prohong the Francs Bail cho pict drive foo Test
’ J ! i pio is bi it
particularhy when iertEling 8 ETE tig dorry sD 85 not 10 SLrsal

when a vebicle pr pding it pus aut

Aftgr Pawing CyvertEken:

fight-hancl lane bd afore put
ali overtook if the rad B wel the di
WE TEE TIT

65H.

nm & Teh ots rom PEER
— do mt return Ww the rio Sufficient distance behwetn

tances should DE

usa your direction inclicaton;
gita-gance 10 he right;
change lares
Dio Noy Stay Ure enassanly on ina art Rk) Ene.

a1 thir edge of the matory | poe EIT

Hiri yeti Bats CL
ar cimilar dangers, They warm the driver io ba

traffic jams, oy roads
carah.

G54,
azadal
peo

B60. Manu speed Ferri fou al trader fraans orl matonways and roads far no

to yehiches: S00 ky

af motorways amd roa for rrabar vehi: hive pefcunily over wid

approach raat

mm mn mm more en ial hol w ™

ell

53 E———— LL)

Wow Wow Www www www Ww

|]

BE2. AcCEss are
are only in parler oa
the right’, Acces lanes
nounced with the @

or motor wih
Appa |
mn this lel r vehicks are ah
vehicles approaching from the left

fr

863, ‘Acces lane from the right’ ar-
raunca 10 ihe x Ine
and roads tor mo IC that he
must expect vehicles from Ine right
evar though be has priority Ove them

G84. ‘Acces lane from the left’ an
nono to the dinar an rods {or ma
for vat stat he must expect vebi
ces fram the leit even though ba bes
priceity ower Than

100 WETHER

BEE. Eroken-cioen wafices on mic onwEYs SC (TE
towed! to M8 next at only (0 rex 4d km
ior hie peed and of the fLsh verge

5 for Ine vehickes ma
Pinan rowing, the nghit hand ian is

B66, Binking {hazard fis
motores Grd OAL

vw [8 swiiched an wher a weincia 15 On iow Orn
= for molar wetiiclas

GBT. Turning Om mokon
places where indicated

aril romds for motor vebacies is only pemmithed

Li-iLirms ang revarsimg &e profiled on mclorEys anid mas Fo Frey

ac
25

668. Middle lees of motorways may nol be crossed, Excaplion: Diivear sans,

670. "Turn loft ahead.” On motorways this sign sig
rif the diver has to change to hi oppcsile car
rEgEWEY

#71. ‘Oncoming traffic’ is put Upon stretches of

omc where the driver does not gxpact oncoming trafic:

_ gn mplorwEys, if ona ane Is reserved for the oncom-
rig traf (2.0. rie bo Toa Works ar grtidents on ha
opposite carriageway),

_ at thie begining of roads for motor vehicles after the
sign “roars for moto wanickes' if ha road for Matar
vehickes folic & MCADONVEY

€72. “Turn right ahead’ an rrctocways signifies {hat
the driver has 1o change 10 the right hand carmimgeway,

E73. The diver may usa he Push verge and he signaled stopping paces fir
Pymskcown vehicles oily for SmEBreErTy sions. Walunitary stopaing & abowead any
al the sirREET parking places. Passengers must nol sep an thi cAmEADEWE)
Lo aa’ F -

§74. ‘Stopping place for breakdown vehicles’
idevitiias places far amergeriey sigma arr mRDnElyE
andl roa for rotor vehioes witht Must verge; volei-
dary sionping or parking 15 pf ohibited

E75, Emergency sops are:

. Breakdawn af 8 vehi, irchacing sudden opecaiing diffieuities, which could

eopardise is safety
~ Acsigtancs at a mad acoiclant
_ Testimony. at & road accident
_ particularly bad weather
= ddan lines of indispoestion of iriver Of passengers
— Scien urges with alderly pecpla of childman
— Checking thi load

RE —— LL LR LT]

Polizei
BOO mM

ETE. onder to facials ihe sohess
of police Cas or smbulances when
have are traffic ja and AcCiiemE
pars on the nghl fand lame fave 10
fman close lo the Rush verge and cars
| a the other lanes to the ar alt

G77. ‘Traffic information by radio’ is sal upon mao
torways and roads for motor velicess Cnn

a1 [f the frequency range Changes,

oo) After important access lanes and before lang tunes
oj in border reas.

678. ‘Police station’ is 581 up On MotonseEys ard
roads for motor vehicles 7O0-B00 metres bafore th
exit pal.

B79. ‘S05’ felophone sans are placed on the right
edge of motorways and roads for motor velackes at ine
tervals of 50m,

They mark thes way 1 the nest "S05" telephone

E80. ‘Filling station after next! Tha additions
pans can be employed ta anncamoe the rex bul one
ling sation

681. ‘Road splitting’ stands belo Junctions on
moterways and moads for molor vehicles The nar
and type of notion can be indicated on am additional
paral

hyd

rr Te per G82. ‘First advance direction sign’ Il i placed

1000 metres before the place whens The motonsay
lanes increass. | indicates long-range clestinations that
can ba reached on each beach of the motoney This
sign x30 be replaced by (he sign ‘prossechon sign ove
{neg ce motorways and roads for motor vehicles”

dé

mE WN

3 g83. ‘Second advance direction sign.’ If ls placed
Geneve E00 raedres before the place when This motoraay lanes
Lausanne increase. [1 indicates the next org range dastinatiana
Barn arid pogsiole furher iong-reange destinations and if pos

| sible, the names of the mt incticns if the Pw Trebor
m

Ww a Ww ew

li

Fribour f
: Ft way branches. Thi Sign can pe replaced oy the San
ressteciion Sn over ERs on MIonwEYS and roass

for roabor vehiches

m wm mw

E04. ‘Presslection sign over lanes on Motonyays
and roads for motor vehicles” I hex mins mark he
imiddle of the lane. Furthermore the regulations fear che
rection signs apply. green = mettiways and roads for
ator vehicles, blue = main roads, white = S20 ryder
roads]

Ww ww ww w

tT [EES

mom omom

586. ‘Prasalaction sign’ stands al the paint of sep-
aration Bi junctions On Motorways and roads for motor
be yeniches

(LA

tion sign (682)

BE)

=
|

fm

wm
=
a
c
2
=
o
HH
=
&
&

=
a]
Lr
8
5
5 5
o
oi
oO
E
Hh
o
hE

mo
FC
BO
a0
c
-
= os
Ti 1m
aE
[R=
E
CO
Tp lia]

BBG. "Mext exit to’ stands 1000 metres before the
begining of he deceleration lane and indicaios ha
name of the next connection, CONNRCLONS 25 thie
misating points al exits and entries on the CAITIBJEWTYS
of matorays and roads for motor vehicses,

oO gign
g

labia {2
8, Vehicles approacharsg fram the righ

Bnd roads

. Second advance direction sign [B83)
Lanzs av

Motorway junction
1. Boa spitiin

, First advance di
4, Preselectia

Na priority (Bude)

WF
[
pra
pe
7

[=]

a7. ‘Advance direction sign’ stands HOD metres
batons the beginning of the deceleration lane

The namie of the max Bul one conection is indicated m
the upper figkd, that of the nest connection in he ower
field.

ME ERE ERE

Li

688. ‘Direction sign’ stands af he beginning of the
deceleration lane and shows the names of the connec
fiers and, # possible, two Turiher important places, tha
can bea reached by way of the connection;

6808. ‘Exit’ is placed at the departing point of the med
In special cases it can ba replaced by a presalection
EO.

Ww Ww WE EL

| 680. ‘Deceleration lane.’ The ma-
Ni fonway must be Bf on a sigoakd eel
al
Use your indicator in time, amd dole on
fhe decelaration ke Io ihe Badin
| ming, Normally pol ae alowed io
brats only ones you and on he oboe
)| eration kine,

BE
ww

mn

6891. "End of motorway’ stands on fhe exit ramp
shortly before changing ower to the regular road rel
work. After this sion general traffic regulations apply,

E
5
E

mn

682. ‘End of read for motor vehicles’ stands on
thier adit ramp sheetly before changing over to the requ
ar road network. Afier this sign general trafic: regula-

[Ee : Ines

ER

g03. On tha malonyl Fave got used to-a very high speed, after de iii
| CALE : Bry § Pr Fh ape Hor ; ti [TH]
brig endt raaEpl yall driving Bhyliz to ihe changing dangers [poooming trail
cychsis pedestrians]

god; On motamay and ag for maton yehicks UnCHS do nat follow Your
w FRAIL FRY = - ) . ; gi i
F elraciion but Fre chlo signs, IF pod fave chaser thie wo Greco
{ CRRA LL HEE CLCaT = ; herbi
or missed an axl point yout have 19 comdire [oie nex axl ain,

28. Stopping

a7. The driver web wants 10 slop, has io ha considerata creas thi vehicles
pehind, ook Tack!

¢ f = frat r
608, Suad = cl stooping Are peri crab if rio viahicies folio ar i
: : i F = ¥ Ral] -
31 ETIRENCY The wheal should mal hinck ag sliding wis &E not rare
£ = 1 AT [15 TEEN of RAS
vrata,

io oda rr HE
go9, Vaficies iy pol be stopped of piled wines they imder of anoange ie
iraffic. They have lobe stationed on parking SRACES winere possi.

To0, Drivers rst if prssiole; S107 20a {rorm the road, IF hey Stop on The Gar
: LL = it - = L ee Wh a a atharwess 50-
ripgeway it has io be an the adge ard parallel to sare, Uf [pag otharwes sg
naked,

Tod. Shopping on ie jaft is permitted oly,

— if @ traning funs of fre ric,

_ if there is a No parking’ ar No sopping’ Sam
= 5 brats

_ ji narrow roads frre watras) with tke bran

_ frians-waE)y Siresis.

rl rat r= = 1 i]
702. If the Ira fe comes fo 8 atgrgstil the driver may nal Slog on pees

. Ll = Ale I. & 4 a : : ;
crossings and, 8 mar! urcians, on if tranEverse CATRgENEY He well 34 an
[EE B= ro | PTR

fava! CROSSE

(2
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

Voluntary stopping is prohibited:

703 before signs whan you might Aide Iam;

in places wives the view is resincled [mel bends and brows of b

mya ancl roacs for motor veiiches;

in narrow resets of beside obstacies
on preselsctive sections of road;

an Jewel crossns

mn Subways

an the camsgeway

Voluntary stopping is further prohibited:

TIS. next fo cortinuous Fes amd doh
jgast 3 metres widdh ie

= thar is maf 8 passage of &

— af or next lo pedestrian crossings — wien ne yalowy in an he
smd the neighbouring pavement closer than § meders Io the

ria Crores,

1 — on road funchons as well 85 before

and after them closer than 5 meres

fi he Iransverse Carragewal

706, ‘Pedestrian crossing, no stopping.” Yellow
lines #0 font of pedastnan crossings (Vani Weiler
af or) the camagewd)y or the. neighbouring mave-
mend. fn dne-way streets they are panied of) both
sides Ff tha road,

707. ‘Standing prohibited’ profits voluntary
stopping on the side of thie road where the sign stands,
Ternary excephns ar writierr an an adoihioog
pane, &s wal as beginning, repatitian amd and. [I hs
sign stands near (he edge at the carriageway iT apes
aien fo the adfoining Raven

708. Exceptions to ‘No stopping’. This san i at:
tached to the ‘Standing prohibited” sign 1a inclicata
termiporEny exceptions

lustrated panel: From 08.00 mw 11,50 and from 14.16
bo 17.20 hours to slop to gat inte or alight from the car
az wel Ba reid loading and ui doading of goods is 8l
lowed, Free 20:00 to 06,00 hours to park is allowed.

700. Af less than 10 mates from ram and bir atop signs and i front of fre si
finns you may stan only fo alow passengers fa gel Inte or akght fram the Gar as
jong &S, in ihe process; you da nat hinder puilc fransport or the fre brigade,

740, Stopping on he rig hinoUring pavement al publ Dus SOPs is not
allowed.
711. Stopping Aloogsite velices parked parle to the readsicks is alowed omy

fier thie rapid loading or Unioscing al goods and whan na hindrance is alsa io
foe traffic: vehicles moving off must be alipwved to do sa at ones

TZ. When gettig noo out of your car 13e care rot 16 endanger other road
users. Take special cam when opening your doar and look behind you (cyclists).

743; If avehice has to slop to load of unfload goods on a read whens the traffic
pou be endangered, £.0. 8 DENG rnicitaim road, 8 breakdown Sion must [a=
sab up, OF 8 person placed 10 Warm {hie trafic,

29. Parking

746, Parking is when you stop your viohicle ofher than to alow passengers to
get in or alight, or for the rapid Ipecling or unloading of goods

He

LO

ER ———— TRL

"EET EERE RR

oo momo mmm Mm

(2.51

I

TI |

I

Ww IL Ww

717. Save space Whe paring but wahoo! ingen ain vehicles rom dmang
off. )

748. If parking is afiowed for a imited time tha wehicla must [saws ihe spane ba-
fore fhe expiration of the parking time. Its prohibited to: occupy another parking
space Neary

#40. Pedestrian ore not allowed to reserve parking spaces. it is profited 10
alace cine or crates. on parking Specs
au rust not snatch enay & parking Soace fom a wil Ca,

20, Bicyoles may be parkad on the pavement, a= ling as they leer @ passane
of at least 1.5 metas width res.

TH. The parking of vahicles afer
than evokes and mopeds is profit:
ffed, 8s long 85 signs oF markings
claarfy profil this. Without such Sans
and makings you may slop ore the
pavement only far rapid booing ard
unas of goods and for ging peo-
pie in ane out of vehicles; for Dedesty-
| ans thers must beg passage el ee
of at least 1.5 meres width, The load
ing and unfoading and gating in arc
aul of wahcks mist be carded ow
without delay:

722. Where parking spaces ae designated, vehicles may park ani on ig
Saparate parking Spaces may omy be used. Oy viele: far which fhalr s2e i=
sults

723. Parking Spaces are marked DY 8 CORINUOUS whita line; exceptionally they
can bis designated by partial makings or 8 special surlece.

724. Parking places that are meserved for a gpecisl category of persons ane
marked by yellow lines

725. ‘Parking permitted’ woicafes parking sur
faces, Limiations of the parting thine amd srrtitismdm fo
park, 25 wall as any thar parking reouEloas, may be
clicated ofr art acca! pane.

"7

726. ‘Parking disk compulsory’ indicates the De:
greg of a zona in winch vehicles my bi parked oly
with 5 parking disk. Tha arrow on the parking disk is 13
wea] fan The Tr Foilon a Pour of ara

Tha diek rst ba well displayed bebird the front wind
BOTEEN

it ia ct stowed To ater [und cnvieg Bw

bap

C ra Ihe hile fone: _- z 3
e plist in 08.00 and 17.30 a5 Detwaan 13:30eng THO0 =
ares Four n ail
hal tre etwas 71 a0 and 13.30 unit V4 0 and Aral ine Ga
— Arreal [irre Oe CL hii } melvin 15 indicated an
oe. 60) and (8.00 Lifir unt C + resi i
mean TEL DCH rl Ga LA L i j : dian
ar ccitionst panel Ahan also valid on Sundays ang public frohoays
bl Barking time wilh soko pana!
= J from 30 manes owas

FrREc)

798, Parking sufaoes Wines |

727. End of parking disk zons marks the dnd
sana in which wehices may De parked with ne |
dhisk the beginning and end of ha ole Ene id
rari also bya Rue and wits double ing actss He

CArmagEnvEY,

, tha "hil zone wilt

700. ‘Parking meters’ desgnEles parking is
whan mator vahickes may be parked only agamst pay-
: ragLiEtEns thal are marked on

meant according 1o Uy
{rie peaking meter
Paring in addition 15 mn a ng. fs:
if the parking time has nat pire when the vel ais: ci
war artes. than be inbens: this lms Paying after sxpiry
ol this imneritad time 1s pro glisllind

go I Lr
aneral profiled (See na. fos)

Ld

(a |

=~

J

Ee———————— XT JH |]

LUI TI TR I TR TR VR I RT TR RT RT RT TT TT a

720, ‘Centralized parking meter’ | ceniraized
parking meters ticket slot machines) arm used, the in-
Ol | lize] parking meter” is written uncer th
Sign "Parking meters

The vehicle may be parked only according to the magu-
lations thal are masked on the ticket sof machine

The driver has to put the ticket at a visible spot behind
thie wine] soresn

IAN. 'Park house." In covenad-m patkang lots the

g "Parking permitted’, ‘Park rg-disk compulzany”,
in] malas’ as well as ‘Direction eign and distances

oan Be indicated wat chard real

732. On parking lots thal are subject 10 t=, paying in addition belie exping of
time is posse, only In accordance with reguiations that ere marked an the park-
Ing meter.

733.

Other mulli-track vehicles such as motorcycles with sdocars of trailers
can 2

20 ba parked on spaces for motor vehicles provided the parking disk is

or

Salp motorcycles may mot be parked on spaces reserved for motor vefiicles.

734. It porking surfaces &
spncing symbol B shown an

arvil for special types of vehicles & core

the: sign in the blue fiskd or 1 additional panel

Parking is forbidden:

735. — wien sfopoing is prehite
an findgas
— front of entrances 0 privada lard and boldings;
— 0 Cycle gino amd on he Go away adioieing,
TIE. — an main roads outside bull-uo areas

= EET Fs Dwi -nr Arases where ims
aloe Wa cars fo pass iminimewm 5 madras)

3 rer wok De aT io

before and after ave! crossings (In bult-uo areas
Ouit-up reas 50 rmadras).

737. ‘Parking prohibited’ prohiifs parking an the
signalled sige af the mad. Slopoing io alow Dass
gars to get i or akght, and he indcing or unigading of
grads i alowed. Temporly @ ceptions as well 55 bo
giving, reatition and end arg indicated on aodilicoal
panels, Jf the sign & situated on the edge of the car
riageway i abet gisn fo the adioiing pavement

748, 'Exceplions 1o no parking.® Stopping only
fry 5.00 10 20.00 To dllow passengars fo get anor
alight or for loading ano uninading of goods. Parking
omy 20.00 10 06.00 hours is aflewsd,

740, Zig-zag Hines mark pic franspo Dus SEs
and you can grve of You may ston hana fo slow pas
sENQars fo gel in or alight a5 long 8s yaw dr vo idan
the buses Loading and unloading as well as parking
arg prahibded.

740, ‘No parking.’ Where ines prchist parking you
rey Stop only to alow passengers to get ino alight ar
fer toading and wricading of goods,

741, ‘Mo parking space." Whee falls profil park
ing, ol may stop amy 10 allow passengers fo gol in or
aight ov for lnackng amd unfeaming of goods. iF the fisid
boars an (nsorpiion fag Tax] the vehicle concamed
must net be absinached,

742, Cn namo meds vehicles may park ory Sl one side If the passing of other
yehickes would ofhersiss De hirtcierac.

mom om ome mmr

mom mm

m™m

WOW WWE EER

EEE RERER

743, Vehicles without oficial registration plates may not be parked on pubec

roads or parkings. In particular cases the competent authonties may gran a-

ceptions. Vehicles without registration plates may anly be parked ex pilvately

ope publ; parking spaces if ihe owner of the parking area gives parmisscn 10
50

30. Securing the vehicle

T48. When leaving [he vefick If has to De spored sopraonaiete. Tha enging
fas fo bea timed off and the driver has do make soe the vahicls cannot roll away
The vehicle mus! also be secured agavish use by unauthovizac pErsEng fuse
handbrake oF iow gear). Cars with autovnarc rans Weston; Pul fhe lever nF ipo-
sition for parkvag): fake oul Ihe igofion key. For passenger vehicles: put om ourglar
stim, lock windows and doors or oo

747. On a siape put on fe hanobrake, in onder to kesp tha waiiola fiom aoling
th fut i the kevar pear or fan he whess lowards an abstacks al iho side of
the road. :

748. If the slope is steep all vehicles must ba secures] by wedges or Olhes
{stones for example), These heave to be removed fram the road hefore drivitig
SWE :

7498, Inthe case of combiration of vehicles and detached lakers, wedges have
to be ued] aean if the slope ia less steep. )

31. Warning signs

TH2, You have 10 give warming signals where ir i
i : whara (rafs saisly regques Bf
warn The ofher road Ses, ) BRR

753. Tha driver has lo dive so vat scoustio warming: signs or fasting of Sgiis
arg not necessary He may give such signals only where iraffic sal requires

[a] - "
754. Sound your hor, however, whee childean rear the road are not paying at-

tention 10 the traffic a2 well as when approaching bind namow bends outside
ii ~- Lip Seas. :

—— —

tre alioived tor ghie Signals only bi figshing your hesdighls
mitted cinly for ermETEeRcIEs

755. After

Acolistic signals are De

hagdlgfits fo gicyial cunng the day is any permed az 8 amg
fae Ha 8K

warring sgl
A OaTals wf wiErnineg signals ara prairie Tu SETHE

=
ring fights [hatin]

Lirmacessan Sntl
= homies

T5T.
applies for wr to

wz gre prohibit ed

9B. Caiing signs with Acouslic WRITHING OE
trical installation [hoe Eparmpe continuous

10 be cliscormected

vit bn fhe Elin
“aie Nas

764, [fthos Ed shart «
sounding of The hom] the [athery ©

32. Operational security

rational sale condition. The hdr

late cay ir En Ope

762. Vehicles may CH

ar of 1
hus to inform thes aun res garding any oN nat : " aaa
feral lon. +f track width, Whigs and exhaust pipes 1 at Are TIDY En
ail
ype i of car
7 fly ar Ta -
763. Tha hide gd Jver are « response for the oparationel safely an

Ih hi he ar jf FESO
tenance of the verucda, im the first place LK CCIE

inka and fhe oad conform io reg-

Ti lr IE
764, [iw dis in in signal as wall] mist be Ava
ra Sarid a the cor fhe er ghoul last ip]
abla, Farhi after fen q the £8
Lakes

disatntec] driver

signs (national neg lighan
sno clriving] mErars TILES DE Hap

765. Regstration pales and SPEC

ale) mus te lege, li gists, rear Boris, WTO's: 3
plesn
& i 5 | ackE,
TEE hts and registration plates mist NOL De Tics y ly load, HAs [=
LINES. SE r

woos toois or 5

t the tier mus! oor Hira With spe

767. Mcasa relat
repaired Wino oHey

fal caro it should be

momo WW
Ip ——— TY TH]

hated odol

eT 1. UO TO

mm

1

Wh Wh ib iL Ww

Teh, If the all controd lamp lashes or the of p
while ching, You Must oeck hy irre
passe away Irom the camageway Che

aps on the manometer
ting off ard stop — if

ee Ol [awe

768, the:
to check. Che

Lb

ni CUTE contd lamp lashes you must go fo the nest garages
k the W-ball

TT0, Change vou ives #1 me, wom aut hywes on 8 wis surface Can Ess Sh
ding.
+74. |i the sevice brake footbrake) fails vou must bse the handbrake.

| both
brakes gil you must change down and, It necessary, driv into an obstacle (har-
oar, rook ace, alt.)

TT. Yo must switch aff the anging nt a closed ares because tha coo
and adburess exhaust Limes Are pOSoMNIUE

773. When you ar filing up you must tom the engire off and eiEin from smok
ing. Danger of explosion

774. || ihe carburettor shoud Burn extinguish the lames with fire exclusion
or with clots: Never Lise wialor

33. Equipment for light motor vehicles
The law prescribes:

777. A steering assembly that has litle ¢

and is easy 10 Operate,

TT8. divicled brakes system (looibrake) that is effective on all wheels.
hrib syste fails this should ba clearly visible [control lamp)

ba]

IF the

T70. An auxliary beake (handbrake) and a fraser ban
binad none device. Hendbrakes and traf
least two wheats on ong axle; The bailar
cred In svich a manne, that #

wiorake. They can be come
= handbrates must be allio
Mandbrake must be mechanically. 58
cannot release on ils own,

a S—— i —

T80, A revarss gear

81. Ancacoustc warming devios frator hor), Only. horns with an inwariabie
ard Lm sited sound are allowed. Burglar Scoustic Warming tkinnes
iwi. Sirens and shill warming devices as well as athe fancy bars ars §
kan.

782. Direction indicator [binker].

783. Sell-opersating windscrien wipars with 2 wirdscresn wishes

784. A device (defroster vention which prevents {fv ging Le Or tha Sieaming
Lig oof the windows during ding, at least in the radius of action of the wiris Green

WIESE
TBE. Safely bells

T865. A breakdown sign ina suitable shaatl argl aasily accesso

mica, apart from the
ear lear Bak

787, An effechve and Ranmiess acoustic Durga warming
on and door locks, such as & staan] wheal, ransEmission .

7BE. A driviveg mirar auiside beth on fhe jefland right sige wlll wi
can survey a1 wast 100 metres to the sin
wirsicmvs wiakel are nol Camping loads or
tha isis ciriving rimae Jo replace the ng Fang crime mre

th driver that is also visible al teal
a5 faster than 40 kmh. A mileage In-

789. A spesdomater nn hie fish of wii
anc] shows keh, as long as (he veri
dicatar is not Necassary.

700; Registration piites. They shad maf Be ciangad, bent, cul Lp Or mag rif

lal HE,

124

mom om om om wow

rw)
"TE ERR RR NN

ry 43] (hn

Il

Ww i ew Wu

791. Swiss national Insignia (see no. 312)
oourtry where tha vehicle is reg

I
Only the national elie: of the

10 IPE Wimasy
far high speed

Check the re pressure regu!

7893, The matedal of praumalic tyres should not be damaged or exposed, Tha
tread deci on a must be af least LB mm,

Nota: new fires 00 not grip wat for Ne Best rnatrags after fitting

It #5 profited fo egreove worn ow res of ale passenger vehics,

Ta4. Al tyres fitted (othe vehicle must ba of the same type iredis or cross phy).

Becommendation: with winter bres use four of the same.

795, Spike lyres are alowed of fpf molor vefickes, maton Cpeies am hel
fraters from Tat Novernber fo 30dAapri, Al the whee on Iw vehicle and they
raters must be agupoed with these and fhe mesximiumn speed 80° mist be
carried af the rear The kffer should be rérrrovied or crossed our whan Same (wes
are Not being used.

Liahicias wi 2 may not ise ether molonesys or roads for molor ven-
ii Exception: AZ batweer Gaschanen and Arolo-and A 13 betwean Thosls and
Boepa

706. A ksk-proof exhaust-pips with an effective silencer,

707. Devices which coukl hinder, deturb or neutralize the official traffic condrol
leg. radar warming devices) must not be fered for sale, purchased, Instalied or
camad in the car, attached to he car of employed In any Way!

[3=]
on

34. Vehicle lights

prescribed in front:

his

ROD. 2 white or ight yalow pos sitar igh

light yelicnw ripped
wy gfficianily
oi

BOA. 2 white ar
Freacficnts which urn
carriageway for 8
50 metres (EE mImEnt 161

Boz. 2 white oF
fights, wich [lt

nay for &

They

sand tor trailers

2 white refleciors on rier vehicles will balers

B03,
migsl niot Bi triangular
Prescribed behind:

aod, 2 rad tal lights

iors (cat's ayes) the gt show fot

an
s penned w {ih fran guar rie figachors aid iim
B Silanhed

B05.

2 [rid Cur rt FLT VET
ETS t=

Bre] rie ik:
k rasan

7 ryl oF yelow 1D waking Nights wihkh light Lp Ww

B06.
applied

126

hen the SErCE bakes AE

hi)

ee — —

mm mw
2 ERR he aktalonheiiy

rm

mm

r=

TR TB

807. Awhile ght which llurrinates
by legible frm a distance o

FE Ear regisina
i at least 20m

tion plaka, and makes i 2

1 a clear jig

3

The following are allowed but not prescribed in fronk

g08. Anopl
ts. generally’ use

WATT

io Sn

adler lashes)
io other oad users,

The main He

am (heaclhghls)

BOD. Fog- or comer lights, white or Baht yellow

The following are allowed but not prescribed behind:

B10. White or yaliow
thie rear of The velatie

renarsa fights

and a cantrally positioned rad brake light at

#44. A white ight which Buriinates (he national signs

B12. Red rear fog iphts, These mst he idaniifiad inside fy & corn KT,

Are allowed in addition:

813. Blinking kghts as breskoow
ahi are switched on so they Blink
A contol mmp must show the cred

jghts. Tha direcibon inc
a do this
whathar the binkeng Sghls arg gwitched on

ator or the braking

Lights on special vehicles:

B14.

Fire- brigades, ambwganoes and ihe police hava

lashing bhie Bghis

baie dels animator velicles and if

3 gir Ecol fo wa
users of a danger they ir oH nod nobce

Thon

HHCIES

Fils 70 5080

816.
ing; ght 2nd

On emergency medical

wahicl
¥, Cross On he ro

a yalow Dink
I BMErgenc a

=, bright, luereraus ar refiective Sigs Or REMINgs on

Pet im be wR ITE UE ave the &
gin. Equal pairs of lghts of reflectors of the same i hea mist have 1

shape, strength and lew [nid

35. Operation of vehicle lights

§o1. iu rust put on your Nghts 82 sao a5 te other reed © WOU NCO

casa from duskount! dat or if he waste rariders if pac

fice yout in firma, in any

aEsaAry

T A r iy Tl Chas a= i
B22. Adomow vehicles parked on marked parking SPACES, OF OF parked SOECEE U

juminated 2 fw bi ihe sire! pis ress rial aL dFnoar fighis Of

- . la .
goa, Parked motor vehicles USE pul on thelr postion and tail Byres, Im DAR hp
areas parking lights an the walfic side ae sufficient ior rrulti-track minor wales
up te B metres ang and 7 ryetres wide without irallensy,

B24. Lise the folowing Kohls whan chirping:
vie should, However be vpicied I

pissita in builf-upe arsds
hi Foglights or dipped heap
the clay fran wskillly [s A263 TT < metres

a) Headights of dinpad hissaiars, fied

in fog; SrovwEteT or MeEavy air, evel during

B25. HeadWahis iikY ba chipped.
a) ir goed time but at feast 200 metres belong passing an oncoming wahice Aran
eid, HF oh 5 [AT 8d aed £555 | Lt
DIAC i
hl immedi Wines 0 NCO
hights
oi when driving i foe. being overtaren and Mevarsylg,

drivar requests by fasting figs “wnt Fea

dl whet an animal Appedrs hefare you,

w

Oe Ew

"

EERE p———— FF J} |

WoW We we

TI

B26. Reduce sped wher civwg o dipped headiphts and do nol awe Io
close fo ihe rg the road

827. Switchio position ight wien stopping for & long

in casa of ralfc

- tiene clue to fraffic,
gl road Works

B2A. Fog lights and comer kghts may any be used ni
heey rain &s wel 88 81 night on winding reeds

BRCTWHETEHTIG Enc

879. Roar fog Nohts may be swilched or any in fog, ENcWSEian oF wary heavy
sain when wiehilih is less than 50 mefres

830. The danger of accidents incrésizes al night. Be caralul ab dusk ard mod
orale your speed

831. With efipped hasolights you staid beable fo stop witli ihe dsiance of
sir

B32. Spool 1 be pec wits i fang at aight foisiebing agri re-
TECiTE, DeCes 5 ard irl

Swi to head 35 GIN 85 YD : f= 2 ghar walle when over:
taking a vehicle OLS bit-pn aress at nigh and’ fF Here (3 Ro oncom rain

§33, Make sore pou Have a good wew (zisan windows, No SLATES rghit]
Di not look aired info the eadights of enooming fratlic, Dstead bok i he
right edge of ine road.

I vow are bfrded then brake
hart

weirs of ‘one-syved” vehicles; give fhe & wide

iofipia-

B34. wi hazard) may be used asa warming of danger im the

Ing o

al on the stalionany vehicle in Baio to the Dreakanmwn Se

bi) ana marked scion bus whan soloed chitren gal ¥ of

cl ora fing valficle before Me Site of an LnesDsclac Jcooam ar b
traf jam;

d) han wir on &-molonaEy arnpads for melon velioes

hy |

WOW eee W eww ERE w Ww

Bas. The breakdown sign and hazard lights dio not relieve the drives ail his s-
spemaibility towards the traffic regulations, especially those concerning lights: 2s
weil ais slopping and parking.

37. Loading

847. A load must ba placed and secured In such & way that it cannol fall down,
disturt or encanmper anybody

848. Loads on motor vehicles may
rial extend forward more than 3 metres

| from: the middie pols of the stearing
whaigl, in tha case of motor vehicles
with trailers, moa than 5 metres be-
red thie middie of the back ade or its
fulgriirm, i ioaeds ae longer than the
nad platform

36. Measurements and weights

838. The wid of motor vehicles and trallers including he lad may not sxceid
5 Fi) mates, Exception: refigorated vehicles may be #6 matnes wide

gan. Trailers drwwn by fght modo vehicles my pe wider than tha traction vehi-
ole but may not exceed 2.5 metres when [aden

840. The height of vehicles, including
thes lad, rmay nob exoead 4 m,

om fom mW mW

B48. The load should be placed so that the steoning axles camy at lasst & lift of
the cwerall weight, in he case of rallies with a ceniral ade the centra of gravily
should be in front of the axle,

850" The inad should nol extend beyond ive sie of mudt-lrack moor ahcies
and frakys, This does not apaly I Soe traders fransporiing nowiaible sports
equipmer! wilh & wiath of maxrmum 2.55 melras or agnocuiurdl Foes cameng
Haj straw or athar hulk nanos

T Bicycles xed on the back of motor-vaficies may extern ie weeks an

gach side wath maximum 20 cm. Masdmom width 2 m
B31. The length of unladen motor vehicles and trailers, with tha exception of ar
ticutated traders, my not gxceed 12 metres. B51. The end of loads that exdend moms than 1 metre beyond the back of tha

vehicle must be marked (al, peranmid, etc.

B42. The length of unisdien carnbinations: (tractor trae units) men not exes
18.95 mi in the case of articulated vehices 18am

BE2. Where posse heavy Dads shoud De camed meio ihe wahicla and nol
ta the roof fo keen the canis of gravity aw. Loads franspanied on the roof arg a
danger especialy on bends

843. The loaded vehicle may not anne] the overall weight as prascrived in Nhu 853. he weight of luggage racks and simisr cevices pilus. ther ad may nol
wehicls registration licence, The same applies (0 traflers, exceed 50 kg or the mami waight indicated in the rgigtestion papers.

854. Removing roof racks and luggage helps lower the fuel consumption of the
f H A i fa F, Sol
844. Infringements of veaight limits for vehicles and traiisns up 10 5 percent; 0 werecla,

ary Gass up fo 100 kg, are nol progecuied

38. Passengers

866. The drivar may only carry passangers in motor vehicles of [Opes m-

stalled seats:

mrmvaved im amd on modor vehicees 85 the
ri velRcke registration Feence)

Only so many parsons. may De
Siratian papers alow (See Mei

af buses and Rohl
I Ge OLS) pane
Trey EAVES,

and passages Ni moor Cars,
had balls
co ith medal

Crier

B59.
arlicaiahed adie mist wear the

FPevat REIL), |

Trex] weaning 5

mBCEnes

of 7 traveling rmiust be ure] appropriately by an

BED. Children under the age o
appliance (safety scat] which has bes ted ar approved by the EC. In he case
;enger saat, sea the manUrEciuers in-

of vahiclos fied with 2rbags lor ne. pas:

structions,

861. Chien aged 7 10 12 must De secured Dy & safety seal or by seal Delis

approved by the EL

gg2.  Mebody 5 allowed to travel 0 compartments that cannot be opened from

tha Inside.

mrcing vehicles and

BER. It is forbidden to board, Slight from or kan out of
trams
g64. Dvivers and passengers should not throw or had objects out of the wef

che with the exneption of processions on a rinsed road.

sucha way Thal hey can nather be inured
e the vehicle, They must ba poo
2and wing. Make: sure

Animals must be trarspared in
their heads out to [he Side nor BE

BES.
fio Etnatc
I¢
i

1 pains! cod, excessive solar imariation, wWelnes:
get erough fresh al

[- = rm P-- - - 3 ‘a al =y

[as

A AER edt

39. Trailers, towing

without thelr own power which are constructed 1o be

arg vehi
wr wehiclkas

BET. Trailars
rasan by

868. When traveling abroad traders must bear the nations insagnia.

BED, Traikes an motor vahisas may only chculate wih tha comaspording regs
traticn papers and registration plakas, Bedore mening off hake sua that tha tr 3 Eu
fs propedy coupled and that brake ges in working order. When driving
forward the trader must net be abil a touch he 0 (raction vehite smn in bands

BTO, Vehichs towing large trafers which cbecure the view to the rear must be
eLipped with tee mimars ba the right-and to the fi which peril the driver 10
si the road oe af least 100 m tothe rear

871. ‘No trailers’ apples [o al motor vehicles owing
radars oihar than agrcutural i oil ci
pened mestarng. WW

ie | Iho

B72. Samitrallers may be drann by Bg semiiralier trucks only il they
tigned In tha r ais iraticn pers of tha traction veincia

Bre [THEY

873. The laden welght of the trader must not sscsed if fered inthe regis-

tration document of the towing vehicle

B74. The maximum speed for fh! motor vaiicles with 8 radar fs 80 mh
B75. Passengers may nof be ranspored on lraies, Exception: an excepliofn is

mache in the case of personne! necessary to guida, brake ar supenicg a ioe,

B78. Trailars, owed vehicles and traction vehicles
Ase Sam Hime:

mist hse Ther lights on at

877. Motor vehicles can only ba Used for towing IF her jracbon piwer and
FE

Dake

B78. You do not need a wohicle registration cence of reqistiation pares [or &

lowed wEmGie
870, The bration sign must be five at the hack of the [owed venice,

B80, Motor vehinies (except mot reaciEst may low ark one othe vericin wilh
ol a trates whic oroken dawn, oF Die froboreycly, Motaryoes may [ed
anky ore mote at the mst For wehicles with an tomatic trans sEn
conaull the tar operating msruchons,

B81. Towing smal mcioreyclas and mopeds wits are equipped willl pedas
and bicycles is prohibited. It is lao prohibited fo push or pull or iow any atherva

Hicks oF object including skis or taboggana

ahiche on io must be in possession of thi apgroon

ki cannicl be sheared By: the lowing Sppialios

gga.  Pecolo may not sit in venice: which are being bowed by 8 crane or ae or

rollers

Bad. A rigid bar for towing may rol 08 [ngs
rraxiiAT 8 mates (minim sng alressl, FOL
iin. Chai and cakes may not be used for iouing mo
alos on thar own, they must Io linked te |

BEG, If moior vehicles cant
ight of the towed vehicle shoud

traction vehicle by means of a rigid ar;
not excesd the Eclen w Sot of the traction vehicles

BBE. A wehick may be foc] with a ropes cow IF iS steering, I ales and lights
& hunatioring pro {in cartain cases lemporany ighis al mig.

BET. The maximum speed aiowed when iowing i= 0 km/h
21 1 E-

BBE. Motor vehicles may push oiler mrator vehicle 1
ed vehicle

der to slant gngine or for & anor anoewng, The diver of re
must be in possesaEon af a licence. Tha driver of the resin eimai mEEn

an eye an fhe vahicls in ion

WON WwW Ww NW WWW www ee ww

40. Avoiding noise and other inconvenience

gad. The vehicle driver must newer inconvenience other row users and near
residents by misking & Roles oF CAUSE) smoke, dust ar fumes. Anhrsals should nel
be frighlened

gaz. To camy loudspeakers on vehicles is not aldwed

8043. Drivers. passenoers and personnal must avoid Making: Nose in
and In quiet arees, y

Ir paticudarn fis prodstifed
to det The motor wan unmacassaniy ar conde

a the motor wien the vehicle is. sfalionary or wien orving me iow

= fon fsd, especiil whan mowing off
fo come and go unnecessary, especialy in resents) areas;
io drive too fast especialy whan
tranaporing Fanos secre k
ard an SI0es,

wahiphy wilh melas pres, whan
and! frafers, wien diving in bends

to ined and urna nosy and lo fransport cans and Similar nas withow!
prepay sec Bnd insilaing them;
tr bang dioovs, bonnets, boots;

io dist others by plawving radios, lane- FEES, GC

Assure Hal vols vehicle does nol err any unnecessary NLmas,

Lig rrcbar wef | pee it ie

2 anal exhaust evan al fi ce avery 12 mo th

Co ponveErer aay 24 months So ri
ginas has fo be done witli 24 monks, Tha axhayus] fest dooms

kent in the car

go7. Switch off the mora waiting trafic, ios fewel Oras:
ary limes of traibe; alc if fae -coas rot delay i go. In front of irefic lle a5

of tae dith vaca

BOB. The dine must drive analy on CST, dirty ar wat nhais, San epchally
during a thaw and Im iat pot inconYerince other road us ard nes mE

dents

OD. emcees appl be waswed ody BY plates whens era ik an ab exiraclo,
not naar streams anc likin

41. Regulations for pedestrians

Paclestrans should use he paverends. Whare EE Are ni PEveTTeniE

6 mist walk along the edge of the carriageway, and if giirrian danger
ki ap fo the fit side of the ree], pspeciaty ol

goa. Pedestrians can walk an he
ot side af {te road If pray this mde
alias Tham fasta ol it af the way or if

liven Falls je (rE

o04, Groups of pedestal ws mst use the pavements; if the cihe radestians
are hirdenad They MUST Kees tes the right sida of the C2 rea, The Bama ap-
plies 10 a bicyds ora hardest up oa width of 1 mitre.

gis. A file af pecieatnians walking akng thie cartagesay OUsIcs 8 uiit-up area
al night or in poor Westher co ition mugt be sxnaized 2i Lo anos by @ oo-
clare amber ight

136

g06. ‘Footpath’ obliges pedestrians to usa this in-
slead of the car Tr 5 arg not al
ones oi facApathe with the ead Irealid wank
es. an long as hey donot exceed walang pace

any. No emiy for pedestrians pronicds ROCESS four

pedesnans

apg. Wham them =a trary stop without a. sire refuge, pedestrians MEL slay
an tha pavement url the tram ElOpRs:

008. Pedestrians must be canal whisn crossing the dad behind ar in frond af 8
walling fram; they must cross without delay,

g10, Pedestrians should cross the read carehully and at the shortest dstancs, i
possile by usd a padasiian Crossng They hava priority an theese ngs Did
ghiedd avaid Stepping on them expecta.

gi1. Pedestrians should USE peoesinan crossings bridges or sutwEys iF hi
are within 50 metres.

B12. ‘Pedestrian subway pedestrian bridge’ ore
nlaced al subways and bridges that are used bry
pedestnans.

913. Podesivans Have pricnly On pOJESINET Crossigs without fraffic. contd,
with tha axception of ams If a pedesiian crassing ie spnavaled by a streal
refiige than each part of the crossing & independant, In heavy traffic pedesiEmns
mist cimss on tha fghl side of the padasiian agai og

014. Pedestrians wha am already an ths le y crossing or wie clearly
shan Thisir intention of stepping onto # have prionty Thies have no right al pronty
if thea vashiche ts eo near that it coud not stop an tre.

137

: of IL GA Wty To vehicles ar
g16. Beyond pads pedestrians mus OVE It

wiih traffic gonial pedestrians may onl CinSS the road

gir clrection hos been rakaaead., In sdditia Erinn msl ‘3

paid to sons and signals by police, military pofica, schoo patrols and Specs
Ights for podesinans

g17. Sports and playing oor : ari pronioiied. Exceptions: roads with
ttl traffic in restdentiol areas and ginal resdente Streets,

42. Comportment during accidents

3 ba rater ahi or bicycle is hed
20, When Gn action occurs in whikch 8 mahal wahilie or AH

1 a Gah cory fl
1 tHoEe Grncened mi tsion immediately They must ir posse, sag ret fhe
il ENE. a gs ER TTR i

= nat fod must help ¢ Loft as
reas involved, prmanly the wahicks

7 (ookce efmargency calf

pa—— i of Fi oes
gaz. All those one iran accident, in particular pESSengEEs, rust help to 6
L hike the Backs, They may only [eae Ihe sil of thie accident without Spa 3
tabksh the tacks: The

tha police in pider to get nee of 10 call the police or when They fs a help

aphEe

az3, In he

; Arm | Her firm
sparse for ihe Gamage Ges Tress i ther wel

azd. [lis nol necassany 1a cal the police in an acchcien with

5 w 3: wer hicling & thind party
wabsrig the areal arid Tis family or ssdatves and whch

saree by calling 8doG

rh -
Bape rol irvokied in an acckrhant must
g26, Peopla no : sain

tar or th police, transporting he injured or cont

ie gufficiont if fhe DRrson ie

Tor Ipures ire

DE — a 1 I
OW OW WWE EYEE EE ew

— mE

Tw

G26. Lint the arrhal of fies pOSce & only 5
injured persian for RE OWNS
Injured pars Mus be mar

an the rasa,

G27. Curious onlockers should not remain at the ste of an accident of ese
Thad webilcies n

the site of Tho-accickent ir roe io hel

ty the pobCe

928, fonmatens damage f

ia owner of thie propa al once

posse, fe must caniact the

damage). i frof 5 arid fo dade a visiting os

gal. A over who learms only lator IEE NE Was of

an gocidan| must return [oie Sie af enoe ar go fo if

831. Incase cichersls on le x of disturbance of trains caused by
veicles and Inada blocking the radway instalations; the milway authorities must
be Infanmed Immedstaly

832. if thera & no obligation to repos an accident to the police; It should De
nated in the European Accident Protocol

43. First aid

835; |ncase of an accident ona must make sure immediately whether the Wie
tim is In danger al death

B36. Immediate danger of desih exosts m Ihe case of LnCoNacicuUsnes
al suocatan, diriculby aol Dressing (suliocat Ci), are
ibfeading, shock)

Enger
! cincustony oeslurdance

ga7. li necessary, the fofawing uTENt mlasLIres for saving life ame 10 De
apphed (Bl Gther MeasWEs can walt until the armel of a dock ©F8 trav

hasdpe

— B38. Unconeciousness
An (FCORSTOUS person iF 10 be kid on
| hie sic and paver to be sft unal-
| tendo, Care #5 [0 ba tekan hat
| rasthing i mot hincied,
|

Difficulty in breathing. _
in injured condo ks nid hreshing adecuately (Holy brgathing, schon
sight rise and fall of the chest, bls lips, face and fir gesrielts) lay him on ims a Bh
fit his head backwards and frag his nose and moth fram foraign Dehes, fe
cesalid blond, vomit, ete: [f the sans of inadanuste breathing oo nok BAGH pc?
Anper, ar tha injured parson fails to breathe (ro audible oF tangle ont a
treath freon nose of mouth, 1a nse arid all of the Chast, discolouration of the fips,

(aca and firgearnalls), ards respiration must immeciately be applied (wih the
patient ing an nis back ar, if necessary, on [es Cal [21

B= - Place one hand on top af he pa:

fient's head, the athe wooer Fs anim,
rinse his moh and 1 Ris head cently
ac far back as possible

mM EETEIEERE EERE EEN YER

TT | - Cpen your mouth wide and How
Int the patient's nose, A RancKencies
of sdTeliving siméar can ba placed in
babwiesn. IF the nose 8 blocked, baw
into tha patients slightly opene
math

a Take A deep breath and obese

| whether the patient exdhales; repeat the
process until he breathes of Dig own
BoGond

040. Circulatory disturbances.

Ji casa af shack (pale face, no (angie oF only skght pulse, person is desadl Ey
the petiant fat, keep Him wan and do not eave him unattended

Lack af puss and mo signs of respiration can be a sign of chrewlatony colapas.
Carclapimonany resuscitation (ORR) & ridcated

Bleeding from the mouth, nose snd ears are signs of serps intemal jury: dono
leave the injured parson Lmattendad, Figce fim an his soe!

IF the patiant i= bisecting mn gushes or cifienvise profest: ree tie mrad imi,
apply a fourmiguet or press @ finger an the sours of bleed

a41. Furher massures: protest an injured person against the cold and ihe sun
If posse, side & rg ender bir, Give him neither alcohol nor any other beaver
aga

842. Pedpl wedged into cars shoukd be rapidly but carsfully freed andy whens
{hae is ariditional danger (lire, possiblity of being run over), The respiratory act
must be kent free and artificial respiration camed out ales in the case of people
wedged in cars

ves and rugs to protect yous sell whan Saving
rar pEonlE Who are DUeming of wisp tham

o49. ry the case of fie; LE
people from buiming cars Por w
in ngs and ral hey an the grounct

G44. Persons sufiering rom fractures or pan In their backs should not be un
Pecasesrty miocvad bi lef io the attention of a doctor or qualified helper

decyde whether a pa
J reuired persons

g45. Transpart. It Es up 10 he cooler or ouaified hatper 10
flent can De transported ar not, LINcansoous and sances
biz transported only in & suitabla vehicle and under expert SUpanisan

mick

44. Liability

@48. Tne owner of a motor vehicle i fiabie for injury ar death of & warner beng
vi well 15 for the mater damages caused by the moving wahicie

nag. The cwner of a stationary mitor vehicle 5 liable for darnage caused nan
seciden by hie motor venice [| the person suf rreaterial damage or injury Gn
circ tht the cewnier or persons for whom be [5 nes. rile 8s io flames for, ar
that ihe defective conditidn of the maior vehicle was the cause ol the ancidant

A = = By 18
850. The owner is responsiola for 8 taull Causac by himesell as well as for tulis
cased by the vehicks driver or olen parscans irvvobascd

fren liabigty, If be can prove, that the-socident was
fault of pisrsom -suffenng rriatarial
all cr of any persons wor

851. The owner 15 1
caused by an act of God, or by & seno
damage or npr, oF without amy ¢ : h i
whom he is responsible, or without a defective conditkan af tha motor wehicke he-
rig thie cause of Ihe accident

Ths amie is Take for mataral damage caused by another owner, only ff
s wis caso Oy
fhe Accused

o52.
thie person suliaring ic
a faut or by a temporary £55 of tha oor gol jidoement o ss
oRAmiEr, Cf Fy a parson for whom has responsible, of bay thie diedecthsd CONDLEIN

af the mates wens

053. The owner of The tracton vehicle i3 rasntnsible for damage caused DY A
trader or a vehicle on tow, If ha vehicle an ten is being steers Dy a dive than
cosas oF Eat vehicks and the owner of the Traction Weniche SssUmee joi if abil

theo

(2 nN 5]

Ey

=r

r=-—y

NE ERE EREEREREERERERERRE EEE Y

45. Insurance

956.

Trach

A vehicle may net be used In traffic unless third-party msurance has bean

967. The thid-parly Insuranca of the action vehick alo covers dam
cased by a trader or a dehiche on Tom

g58. 1 £ abil ly of he ewer dnd peacns tor wham he is
responaile according to he traffic egulatons

859. The thind party mnéurano only covers damage cased to & third party,
960. Tha right of Indemnity of parsons suffering Injury or damage, must be co
ered by the insurance foe an amount of up to minmom 3 milion francs for avery
accithent inchiding personal iruey and matesia| damage

861. The motar wehicla thind-pary insurer must cover personal injury ard mate-
ral damage © d fy unknown or uninsured mater vehicles ar bioyoles. There
i 7, Gry ecEss of Sf 1000 -

8 that excess (he Bmount

[eran SUM injury or
HWS Ne: NSLINST INSLERENGE Company) within
COVER,

983, For ovary cham hor

5 of the third-party inslrance, the folowing
Starrs ae charged fo he

apcount 4f the policy hipkder fone)

— Sir 1000 — if ne over of he wales inoled inf

accident fas not reschacd
25 years of Sg;

Sin 500 — if the dover is over the age of 25 at the time of the sccident a
ir possasgian af the Swiss diving-tcence fr
drive an nswed motor vehipke, The banners
sansa

Lal
=p ! avthharizes ihm io
Bog ooas nol spol ir ths

B64. The third-party insurance presnium is reduced for driving without accidents
fhanus) and increased Tor avary aim for damages: [makis)

965. In certain cosas the insurer (neurmance compa) has the daht of recourse
Wig-G-uls the insured policy holder.

Soir cantons Reve 8 emailsary fire-nsarancs (2. Canton of Bama)

5h.

denasitad with the EompakeTi authorities the
ural 18 informed by tha ET Dries

I the registration plats
ThE NS

DET.

TSUrancs 15 3U5

cles

comprehensive and legal prot aGtomn INSU

jar, driver, | irglary-,

ances are Nok Corp Ta

46. Penal laws

. 4 apntenca (fine, datantion, BX api), Exceptions: mi
frijury 00 1 ial demage to & ihnd
Thies fires up to 15U francs}

ari.
ric trac
party rey De
can ba paid irprrcliale

{inly @ pidge
L Cas SE [erat
Amal with try the poles of the spol
or within 10 dis

# the roacd traffic aw tha

arz, A personwhod regards the tralic ulations Oo
iudfitryant. thereod, will be prungshad Win clatpntlon ora ire.

fedy nf olhers: oy, 3 Gey

3 - ke
. Oh parson who Cees a panos danger ine
oe ; will ba pamishad

aus viola of the traffic regulations, oF whi reckons with this
witha fire Or pRSon (Clauss BO, parsgrapn 2 EVEN

a line

a prinished wih

afd. A person driv urdar he infience ol acahiol will

oF prison.

saraan who wtf renbeys ipods Leroi

aa reckon wilh or LAT ACTERERCATT
smination and wing ooes nol revel The reason
isi wilh EXTEN fra hing

{ enh Er Fi
heed] ir an aocadent, Wino wickates hig chity impassis ny nim

O76. A person my
the law, Wil be puaniehied with deterbon of a line

ar?. A hil-and-nn drives. who Injures of jeff somata in an ack ant, will be
ris huacd wath pest

=

E
E
!
!
|

Ek |
+
h. |
EL |
|
3
|
|
= |
-
-
-
>

— (—

gy

878. Mh person who defiberately Impars the ©
which could result inczan it, wll ba
BOM acts negligently the punishment 1 desk

al safety of aw
Linizhed by a fine or prisan. I th
on or A fina

a78. A divarwha is aware or would disco try his dutiful aftericn the
hicks does not comply 0 red lations, whl be pursshed with a fire or date

GAD. Theo Caner oF 8 Person Stig a3 an mane whi Is res
erational satan of & vehicle will ba punished
Abe Or negigenly
the roguiaiicns

a! fica {hat
hi detention or a fine If he deliber-
joleratas the ums of & vehicke, which does not C piresspond Io

L

gi. A person who dives a rotor wiahicks without tha required cance,
— wWhoignomss (he restrictions and Injunctions rmieificned there,

- swiho anfrusis 8 mobor vehi (oa person, wha he pyaar would discover by

hit cutiful attention; is not in possession al ne Regul ed fence

— sah Linclestake:

BCCOMpan

5 driving lessons without the earners cence or the foresee:
or

— who asses he role of an SC00MpanyIy) person willl being quiaitied.

wit gives driving lessons pralessnraly withold the red

riecl teacher's licence,

will De punished with vlatentson or a ing

g8Z. A parsan whi drives 8 malar venice
parce has been reused or withdrawn, wil be punish
meen 0 dens or & fine

= drivers or eames §

wl with a datention of miry

GB3. A vehicle driver who does not carry with him thé necuined Hoe
mites wll be plniahed with 8 firue 0 10

1 ry Sir

ag4. A person who does nol eormmuricaloe within 14 days any change o
or replacement of a lisence or peri will be pureshed with a fine of up
francs;

[1:58 ithe road trafic law does nol distinctly prescriine othenyise, an act al Ned
gence i punishanks.

BRE, Tha judos can forgo & senterscd in minor casas

47. Licence withdrawal

The withdrawal of a diving cence or the orter 10 fake 8 new
arslical driving examination 1s nd punishment but a measure [ERE 10 pre
vent further sesioug Inlingamertaol Ine Ew,

driver blarmetuliy
the traffic. The

990. Tha driver's or leamer's licence can De witholraen if 1
bragks the iraflio regulations and theraoy endangers or dish
Lacie CAM PrONGLUNGE 8 Warming in minar Ee

agi, The divers or learner's hoencs mus Ive wither, if td climes
a} endangers trafic ina sends Manan;

bh 1s driving under (Fe influence of alcohol;

r iniLring of killing SormsDodyy ooes not Sos

od} misaporoprlales a car ion use,

gl im rot capatde of dogs not alter bo drive without endancienng or daturieng
others;

i= 5 motor vehicle in order to commit § Cre of repeated for oiférses

with criminal indent;

ab wilfully disobeys ar avoies unclergaing an crossed Dood teak or a bioad te i he
with or undergoing 8 supplementary medical examination and who

ior theta measures

can rach
does nod reveal tha eas

drawal of driver's and learners ICences 5 [res
stances; amounting bo nowensed

gfr2. The duration al the wil
scribed aoconding 10 he Circus

a) at least 1 monih

wh at least 2 months, if the diver was unde the infiance of aksohol;

ch at besa Bo months, if the diver 15.0 3 vahicla in spite of the fact his eens
has bean withdrawn or d thea Ac a must ba withdrawn dus toa conirasen-

3 : d fF the baat ail Peet |
tian. that he has comsmiled within 7 wages gince expiry of the Est witholreneiak

dy at least 1 year II he driver Was again LEK
ara situs spiny of gn earlier wilhckrawal due to driv
af ploohal,

148

Ce  —— — — NE

ME EEE REE REE RRR EY

rE

¢ tive infuence Of alcahol will
1 unclear the miluence

BF, An noo

wiz Nis Boence wath permarenily,

994, The leamer's or driver's cence i confiscated By he police on tha
the iriver

al is obvious under the Influence of alcohol or the test shows an alcohol con-
centration of 0.8%: ar more of body weight;

Bl 5 obviously oeertired or iS unable 0 drive, @.9. dues fo ilness, State ol shook al
per an acciiem, or dus to intake of medicine or drugs;

oh dices not waar the prescribed glasses or lenses

dy undertakes diving lessens without the required accompanying person

996. The registration papers and egieiabon pales ans to Da confiscated, If
a) the requiraments for ther delivery are not at hand;

br) th ae wihio bay fot giving suilicesnt reasons, Tals
hice tes]

Being DIS wecle 1a ve-

a6, The regatration plates and the registration papers-can be confiscaled, d
a the restrichons and Injusticns mentions In the registration pRpers arg groaned;
bl the mgistration papers ard plates were mpropsrly used,

cl the wehichs tax or dies have not been pad

887. The registration papers and plales ars 1o be conliscaled on ha Spo
piekicn IF the required insurance Tor tha vehicle is missing

998. ‘vehicle divers who hava repeatedy violated the traffic regulations na
Hane clargernies fo trafic, must feckon with comps VW traffic leesona. The
duration of this course Ia a5 a nile 8 hours.

147

Appendix

Motorcycles and small motorcycles

teonies Al, AZ and F anted after the
Tor tha categories AT

1000. Tha leamear’s Beanies Te he C3
shecwrdical best has been passed, Enimum age: 18 years
and A2, 16 years for the category =

1004, The keame’s licence af category A Sor red Lo the holder OF & Calagory
2 Ticance fF ha has driven vehicles of calegary Al for af east 2 years, During this
meric Fe must have driven wilbout bring comerdied ary int action al the traffic
miles which would have endangered the traffic

The Fearne cence of tha calagones A A. AZ and F entities the holder
withaul gn accompanying [ERT

1042,
163 undertake driving lessons

1003. When apaying ine fe thaoretical est or category A you hive io encloses
a cariiicate conliTring atterdance ab an MEME frsh-@id COLESE and coir
mation of participation na traffic neon & rie (5 hours) with a driving (each

if category A, Al and AZ antities the bolder to drive
and G,

1004, The difwers liar
yahitles of categorkes AZ, |

AZ

ep of Category Al ia vakd for 2 months, calegonios A,
be projonged for category At for seven months i
dances of 8 practical sementary training can be presented. If the applicant Gan
poe Fie was unable 10 participate in the practical elementary training {prolonged
liness, ale.) the extension is 2 micaths.

4005. The lkesrnar'sl
and Flor 8 moths. ios

mcr of the deliv

ing of 8

Applicants for the category Ad driver's licence mus within 2
ery of the |learme ss canoe, eorpEts 2 practical essmentry fray
with a holder of the category nv jeachers hoance

1008. A metoroychkst cal. A and £1) with & lesmer's oents may nt EATTY ees:
SEMNQES, wba are thamsaves Not mn pos sian of a hoenoa lor motorists,

mm

1

Im

i 1

—

!

Ce  — ——  — — —

"EERE RENEE EEE EN

Ww Ww

Fd PASSENGErs must
onli. in an authorized
WE

$007, Moloicyolas may oly Carry one [EEsenger Dirivare
sit gstide the seat, Children Wn Ii rs
dren's seat; AMES may only be came

7 yes

1008. In a sidbcar each seal May De
passenger Mey, nepaever, take gang a child of maximum

IEC Oey Dy oo

fl Per san
¢ WBArs

A rorwn-Up

1000. Riders of small moloréycles (yellow ragistat
chiid of ma, 7 years on a sale children's seat, The =&
the child's legs, must not hinder the driver @nd ms nt

plates) may rarsporn a
15 to protect anove al
kt be fed closa io the ma-

OF

1010. Motoeoyoie and smal motorcycle ridars may nat iranspon objects thal
rancer signalisation impossible ar endlanger other marl Jeans

Transported objects may have a magmum wich of 1 mat

Arimals may be srensported in cages and baskets oly

1011, Motorcycles ang small molrcyeies may Hot drive rexd fo hopes. Grd

mopeds, In fares,
of the ang

olorcycles am Smal motaroyolas ave io dirivein thie fm

104 2. Ricker of matoacyclas may fil dress meesct to EEch oar unkess called for
when driving In a line of molar vehicles. The same apolies to small matorcyoies.

1043; If afc =
Ihalr place in the

nd modonsyckes have ig: keep
a af vehicles

1044. Smal motoroycles may nob cliouiaie an motareys anil reads for
vahicles,

Tato

1045, For moloieycles and small motorcycles only a one-20a trailer is pesmit-
tes, Trailers may be drawn only by the rachon wehicla ths etic im the rani
licanee, This dies not apply 10 breakdowns a6 wall 85 wenices bing used with a
collective BSance

10718. Trailers Including the kad may not axCeed & mes, wicith of 1 matre and a
ried, hislot of 1,2 metres, Af The rear & mas adenson of the load of 50 om is
parma

1017. It's prebbited to transport persons On rales of matarcyches and smad
mabopcycies,

145

1A. The mesdmunm sped wilh trailers a BO kom

cycle Ey Di porwied by another motorcycle anly, &

1049. A broken-thown ma
- 5 bo Lrlasten it immedi

hie yaad, Tha nder has 10 be

1020, Tha lowing of matomycias Wil pedals in working order is prohibited
1021. The mirmam sins of the third party NSwranca for molorsychas and small
motarcwess amaunt 10 Si 3 millon pes apcident far personal injury ard materi:
clamage [ogaliho

1022. A
foro yoke
cal J ifast

as me Seas and thelr passsnnavs as will a5 noes af
neds have io wear helmets. Exosplions Parsons haw
ha aapected I
ian 10 arc wll az oloor-fo-door ceiver
En TraLE-

Nn detivany areas and wien Cavang ofl

frig pant and

5 wall gs mopars have fo pul [Hg
Hi ight

les, armall marco

ol dn he olay B85 Wen 85

1023, Mofor
dipped head

1024. A shghe moforchoe may nisl Lise A parking spol fora moor wale,

qin a clam for damages, Bee no 963,

1025. Ex

1025, Spkes hyris S08 no. 795

These figures you have to remember!

783. Minrmum of 1.6 mm esd dapth on yes... - Loo 1.6mm

486. Liters distance of al least | mele whan passing
aking crawler vehickes . io 1m

arc oy

g64, Loads that extend more than 1 mate Dayo
{his vehicle mist be marked itd AEE ff |

E

WoW u uuu uw

| et So pn of et if

Fey
— mre

§ =n
a a

E

&

121.

70:5.

BOT.

When sicppegg need to Iramines mmm
distarce 1.5 males

When stopping on the pavement hare must bea

passage kf free of al least 1.5 mets width

Blindrmaim od
behind a slationary ram

sree of 2 metres when waiting

Plenum width Tor motor vehicles and trailers

When ry sol ¢ Pt £0 oortiness fires
ard CoLimE Bners

af fil. 3 meters ie

Mesmurn height for vehicles weil load

A rfc bee for towing may nol Be looger than 5 mal

When stopping volurdarly Det and
after road junctions there must ba & chia
of mmimum & metres to the ransye

inlurvtary stopping closes IRN 5 m lo padesiaan
crossings is prohibited

Fronds with a widlh of less than & metras are
considered] namow rea

Ropes for iowing may have a
IMAXETILIT length of Bi res

5 in front

| Fein Co fw

Public bus stops: al less than 10 me
and behind tram and bus stop egnes
allow pEsSENGErs 10 get into oF akght from the car

Wilbon vehicles and reds
hire

Anal oad may
a mepdrmum engih of 12 mates

Tratar combinations without ioad may have & maxmum
length of 18.75 mi; semitrailar trucks max. 16.5 m

The registration plate al ihe rear af the car h
legible fram a distance of at least 20 mg

fo be

=n at nigh

Panty 10

1am

2m

255m

10m

12m

18.76 m
16.50 m

20m

610.

303.

447.

a1.

825,

B24.

Im ftp areas parking = pro ited within

«0 retres of a level Crossing,

n Duilt-up areas arhiance direction agng are aced
20-100

metres before junciions

In budll-ug areas danger warming sons Are
lane 0-50 mites before he danger point

Cutabde built-up Geass prohibited 10 pa Niigial

od a eal Crosse)

50 rivals

seed at least
rads with fast traffic

The breakdown signal moss De i
=r) metres behind the oihstadia.
al least 100 rmedres behind

Hear fog lights may only be
il this visibility bs jess than 50 males

3 he carmageway
cfm)

The dipped headight must {hari

for a distance af 60 Mares [Bey

This headighits must Buminate the CREE

for at beast 100 metres

Whe ollawing a priority velece you
isl keep adie ol 10

rice of 100 metres

thee Drgalaomm &

WE

iy sl he

dir

On roads with fast
placad of least 100 metres bebind tho

lon Zins ans

Chataichs bdlt-Lig areas aclvance
placed 150-250 m alias before junctions

Otsica DUi-up Bress charges WRITING SNS

are placed 150-250

Haadlights shoud De
200 metres Ere |

qb if thea wisitaity

vic Tene toy use your dipped Mes
during the day = ss than 2000 me

20-100 m

100 m

100 m

100m

150-250 m

150-250 m

200m

200m

r=

re

ATA

=
|
=
~
|
~ |
~
|
|
|
=

on rr
Woe ha

Subject matter

A
Acceleration fangs
Ariditional peEnats 5
Arlvance directa Sgn
on main reads
Adooihal - cy h
Alighl fram roving vihicles
Alpine postal oul
Alfernating lig
Ambidilance
AdpLiApar
Sede wag ht lim

ying Sigal

B

Bend, signs intcatng a

Blirel persons

Birks

Eilinkimg bahia.

Blood Hast ..

Blues lights

BILE Tor. oy ei

[11 1 IR IF

— on mauntain roads
iden raking

Brak, reach to

Bralang distance

Braking fois

Breakdown lamps.

Breskoiowt sign.

BEridla-path on

Broken guiding na...

Burglar accoustic warning
dEvicas

— may 2piny Tor animals |
=ranspart:.....

Charging cumenl Commi lamp
Chen
Command .

Caompartrrent during
accidents ey
Complisony TIE TILT ened

Conliruos ing

Contruous line shes,
Corns kgihls.
Caourdaawn marksn
alan welucla,
Customs

Chycle sinps

Cale tracks...

Zion.
D
Clady panmits ‘ ’ B
Digad end ok a5
[Diacelaration kine : 113
Deer. EH 18

Cresfiniticne =r T

Defroster 1&4
Datrnitation ims iar 5d
Drelvery vans — 11
Diipgoad headlights. TEE 2
Direction indicalos 51

124
Direction Slgns , . ---, 28

aT E
Direction oh

cdloresadd

[Die
Cistancs !
— Dirivireg re He.
Cob
Double fine.
[rina licence
Ta [a= |
— categones
0) ENT
Lirhreg in 12
[wrruing In line,
Dib) ine
Arosa
{ MITEE oes
wing on dipped Te
1g Oe tha § fil

F

Faling ¢ nek.
Filling
Fire bor pu
Fog ghia
Foolpatn
Fundamental ries

ates

154

roa lor

105

2 | EER
ice Markers

me
Interriato

with prrionty
sacthon with road 1 Cul
Haran) priority

L
Laden weighl
| winch Remit

SCIEN

Lares

— diafinithon . .
Lis .

= Indication

Lay-kny

Leama. ;

Ener 5 icence

Lesragth limit.
— SK. FR

Level orossand with berms

y in arch aul of wleCias

ing Hoencs - .

47 Ee
135 i

w BE

aa

16 =
p43 B=

Ta a
12
7a =
as ==
a5
EE
|
130

=
m

gig

m

WoW ou uuu uY Ew

Level crossings
gigNS - 1
License wilckam
Licance

Saal. .
= yithedrawal
Light macrbor waliices:
Lcadmg if
Leading goods.
Louaspes

0]

Miancstory Signs...
Kddrmum speed. . -
EE Tn | PR Ry
Plein speed bm. .
Maasuemenis. .
Wedcaments
Ifileage indicator .
Bln insurance
WER IMU separatan
Ee
Amin Spee:

Misaparopnats Use of Caf

Morar vehicles
Motorcycles -.. ;

hakirsays and roads for

motos vahices.
= celrsion. .-...
— SENS =H
— wignette . . bE
Miurilain roeds

Micring af .

Murribsing of main roads,

[8]
Dil pressure

Dire-yaiy sheets

Chertaking

fram

— Ti gudek
Creaking

ee

Cwartaking an the ight

Civerrtired

Pp
Paral lpres
Fark

WLS
Parking
ig the vehichs

— markings
Sigs
regulation Si
— ND parking
- Ni parking

Partial trafic
Passengers

psig

ain roads, Seep

mals
— ram

i SCONE
Padesliians i
fies of pedestrians
- SI0r
Crassng .

Prony...

markings. .
Panal ws. .

— prionty

oads. .

va pdenticalon signs.

— Fira brigades, police,
ambulances
- fram

Priory Ho we fight sions io]

fog fights ; ; 12%
Hallectorns .. 126

Regrome worm aut Byres
Regulatory Sgns

Fesidential road :
Fevers hghis, -. 12f
Fewersing. .. 3 pi
Hogd —definibon
Paar coma ition. . AZ
Foad markings. . .
Rod with STOP sgn... -. 78
Raol racks Ty 131
Roundabouts, - A Ff

156

Schaol bus
Securing he wihicie

=n BH a.
~ with trailers
pietore a pedestrian
Cees)
Seed Brvat in bull up
Speadomels
Cpa iyras :
Steep road. . a
Staaring sssambly f
jel po of the stearing whes
Stop line.

STOR sign

FL) + i —

- CIN OF Psy
In Tunnels
reqiatory sign

Stopping dstanca.

Substitute vel 5 i

= irfaca prohibited lo raffic

Swing oud

Swatch

= in wnnets

o oars
Sweet Bigs

il hgh

hird-party Insurance

— MOONNEYS
- hts... - : ;
Towing and driving forward

Mm

nm
|

oi] veiClas
Cy Mons. .

Tractors

i» control
Teaiffic In [INES
Trafic frforr
Trafic lessons. .
Traffic fights

oy bry rac

} Blops

way Slreelis.

— sign
componmal
Turning

regulatory siges |
~ 10x the laf
Tyres

u
Unlacen weight...
Uploading goods...

Vv

Vighicle lights... --

= DETR ooivvivaniin
— frailars Em pom

Vehicle registration linen

— with raaal Hh:
Weshices with pnoniby. .

Ww
Whaling line...
Warming cevcas

184 Waming lights

Zig-zag Ines
Zones
br

116

a, |

gardiens gesialiat

167
Answers to the test queslions

Thee rumbers reder to the cormasponding article in thi her Book

Questor: Faght;, Nar Cuestion: Aight Mo;
i b 134 25 A+ AOE BOT
2 t fa a5 bye 161/465
3 a 324 27 bo 324
4 C BS bcs] = 5
5 : 500 b nT
i} 5] Bad b B46
T b 342 a F34ME18
B b B&1 b+ao 460
2] a x3 |
1d ki a4 +0
11 35 b
12 a 51] +
13 b 568 ar b
14 b a71 a8 a
15 b+ hop foe bc
1G b+ aa 40 O
17 B+ 498 41 El REIS
iB +] G23 az [i] ATD
1a a 563 a3 bh Eo
elu] a B06 44 b 1024
21 c a 43
22 a a 500
23 B a+b 201
24 C b 208
Theory test

Thi official civer's test includes 50 questions,

To each gueation hid OF INTEE BNsWers are ghen but only one Or Two SNEsars are
correct, The commct arnawers have to be maroed with a check mark. A numerics
sore Is assigned

For detadied information, please 25H our dmsng teacher

16E

E

oN
.
b
»
b |
a
b |
b |
|
3
b |
3
a3
=
-
a
n
CH
ol

mw mm

mmMmMTmE MP MEME MW

-

| fi i
4 awh WF 2
{i fi! Tix lig wa or
i

questions

E Verlag Autofabeen heute
A. Trachsior, Bam
Fofo: Refies, [Ddrmlan

4
